--- Page 1 ---
BIBLICAL
EXEGESIS
A Beginner’s Handbook
REVISED EDITIQN
JOHNH.HAYES
CARLRHOLLADAY
john Knox Press
ATLANTA

--- Page 2 ---
Unless otherwise indicated Scripture quotations are from the Revised Standard
Version of the Holy Bible, copyright, 1946, 1952, and 0 1971, 1973 by the
Division of Christian Education, National Council of the Churches of Christ in
the U.S.A. and used by permission
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Hayes, John Haralson, 1934-
Biblical exegesis.
Includes bibliographies.
1. Bible-Hermeneutics. I. Holladay, Carl R.
II. Title.
BS476.H35  1987 220.6’01 85-45460
ISBN o-8042-003 l-9
0 copyright John Knox Press 1987
10987654
Printed in the United States of America
John Knox Press
Atlanta, Georgia 30365
Contents
CHAPTER 1: 5
Introducing Exegesis
Exegesis as an Everyday Activity and as a Specialized Discipline
The Bible and Exegesis
Biblical Exegesis Through the Centuries
The Task of Biblical Exegesis
CHAIYIYER  2:
1:
18
23
33
Textual Criticism:
The Quest for the Original Wording
CHAPTER 3:
Historical Criticism:
The Setting in Time and Space
CHAPTER 4:
Grammatical Criticism:
The Language of the Text
CHAPTER 5:
45
59
73
Literary Criticism:
The Composition and Rhetorical Style of the Text
CHAPTER 6: 83
Form Criticism:
The Genre and Life Setting of the Text
CHAPTER 7:
Tradition Criticism:
The Stages Behind the Text
92
CHAPTER 8:
Redaction Criticism:
The Final Viewpoint and Theology
CHAPTER 9:
Structuralist Criticism:
The Universals in the Text
CHAPTER 10:
Canonical Criticism:
101
110
122
The Sacred Text of Synagogue and Church
CHAl=IER 11: 131
1
Integrating Exegetical Procedures

--- Page 3 ---
CHAPTER 12:
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis
For Historical and Archaeological Reconstruction
For Doing Theology
For Proclamation
For Personal Appropriation
141
142
146
149
153
CHAPTER 1
Introducing
EXEGESIS
Exegesis as an Everyday Activity
and as a Specialized Discipline
Exegesis is a normal activity in which all of us engage every day of
our lives. Whenever we hear an oral statement or read a written one and
sget&_ to 
understan~~~been said, we are engaging in exegesis._._. “.The term “exegesis” itself comes from the Greek word exegeomai
which basically meant “to lead out of. ” When applied to texts, it
denoted the “rezding out” of the meaning. The noun, therefore, could
refer to “interpretation” or “explanation. ” Thus whenever we read a
text or hear a statement which we seek to understand and interpret, we
are involved in exegesis.
Although we do not today label our interpretation of oral and written
words as “exegesis,” this is nonetheless the activity in which we
engage. Only when there is exegesis is there communication and under-
standing. When one person speaks to another person, the hearer must
decide what is said and what is meant. Automatically, the hearer asks
certain questions about what was said. Was it a question or a statement?
Is the speaker seeking to communicate something? If so, what? Are the
words spoken to be taken literally or are they conventional or symbolic
statements or greetings? Am I, as the hearer, expected to respond? What
thoughts is the speaker trying to convey? What form are the words spo-
ken in? Is the speaker telling a joke? reporting some news? addressing a
demand? asking for information? giving a lecture? trying to sell a prod-
uct? As persons accustomed to speaking and listening, we can usually go
through the process of exegesis without much effort, in fact, almost
unconscious of the process itself.
Since such oral communication generally takes place in familiar situa-
tions and with familiar persons, we are able to assess the context and

--- Page 4 ---
6 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 7
intentions of the speaker as well as to analyze the spoken words them-
selves. The context helps us to determine the larger complex in which
the event of communication takes place and thus to understand the words
spoken. Is it a superior and/or an official who is giving commands,
offering directions, supplying information, or making suggestions? Is it
a formal and/or structured situation in which the spoken words are to be
taken seriously or merely a casual situation? Is it conversation between
friends? Were the words spoken under normal or abnormal conditions?
Part of the process of understanding oral communication, therefore,
involves the context and occasion in which speech takes place. This
means that the speaker, the words, the context, and the listener all par-
ticipate in the communication process.
A similar but not identical situation takes place when we read texts or
written words. Since the writer is generally not present when we read a
text or a document, the words themselves assume a greater importance
than in a situation of oral communication. It is true that readers can fre-
quently, through imagination and prior knowledge, re-create in their
minds something of the writer and the situation in which the text was
written, when this is necessary. For exmple, if we receive letters from
friends, we have some knowledge about the persons and their situations
which informs our reading of the written words. Nevertheless, even in
reading a letter from a friend or member of our family, we engage in
exegesis. We seek to understand what is said and what it means. We
interpret the words so as to understand what is being communicated.
Every day we interpret written texts with little or only very general
knowledge about the writer. Here, communication takes place primarily
between the text and the reader, and the writer, unlike the speaker in oral
communication, becomes less important. It is true, of course, that the
writer and the reader usually share a common world, common frames of
reference, and a common understanding and use of language. To this
extent, the writer and the reader are not very remote from one another.
When one, for example, reads a highway sign or a traffic direction, it
matters little who the writer of the words happens to be. All that is
required is that the reader and the text on the sign share in a common
linguistic field of reference. The written directions on the sign or the
symbols used need only make sense to the reader and lend themselves to
exegetical understanding. Even highway signs illustrate not only the
necessity for exegesis but also the difficulties sometimes involved. For
example, does a highway sign that reads “Road Construction 1500
Feet” mean that for the next 1500 feet a driver should expect construc-
tion activity or that after traveling 1500 feet a driver should expect to
encounter construction activity? Such a message demands special exe-
gesis and, in this case, the exegesis probably requires prior experience in
understanding such signs.
We constantly read and exegete multiple forms of written texts. The
average student in a day may read an assignment in a scientific textbook,
a short story, a poem, labels on food containers, announcements of
meetings and other events, a newspaper, a letter, an advertising
brochure, the telephone directory, and on and on. All of these texts
assume different forms of communication and represent different types
or genres of written documents. Since these texts are all part of our nor-
mal culture, we have been socialized and acculturated into how to read
and understand them in all their diversity. We know that one does not
read and interpret a poem in the same way as a recipe nor the editorial
page in the same manner as the front page of a newspaper.
Even in our culture, there are types of documents and literature which
require special and intensive exegetical work. In fact, there are profes-
sions which specialize in the exegesis and interpretation of texts. The
need for these arises from the nature of certain texts and their use of spe-
cialized and technical contents and terminology. Legal and judicial pro-
fessions-lawyers and judges-spend much of their time exegeting laws
and law codes and studying the history of their interpretation and appli-
cation. Constitutional lawyers specialize in the exegesis of the constitu-
tion and the history of its interpretation. Diplomatic language and
documents often require a special exegesis since communication in this
area is frequently very sensitive and deliberately ambiguous.
The required effort and means necessary for the exegesis and interpreta-
tion of texts thus vary greatly, depending upon the nature of the texts and
their relationship to normal communication. Some texts merely need to be
read to be understood. Others require very detailed analysis. Some use
normal, everyday language, grammar, and sentence structure. Others use
a very specialized vocabulary, involved grammatical and sentence struc-
ture, and distinctive forms of expression. Some texts employ symbolic
and metaphoric language. Others seek to employ language and words so
as to limit severely the range of meaning and the potential for multiple
interpretations and misunderstanding. Some texts seek to persuade.
Others seek merely to inform. Some texts are produced to entertain.
Others seek to produce some particular response and action.
The degree of difficulty involved in exegeting and interpreting a wide
range of texts, and oral communication as well, depends upon two basic

--- Page 5 ---
8 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
variables. (a) A primary factor involves the degree to which the sender
(the speaker;-a-or; or editor/collector) and the receiver (the hearer or
reader).share a common world of discourse and experience. When two
persons who share a common language talk or write to one another, very
few problems of communication develop. Few difficulties are to be
expected when they exegete and interpret one another’s oral and written
statements. The greater the difference between their normal fields of dis-
course and the greater the disparity between their range of experience,
the greater will be the difficulty of their communication. They will expe-
rience greater difficulty in exegeting and interpreting each other’s forms
of communication and what is being communicated. For example, two
persons from a similar rural environment or two persons from a similar
urban environment would probably have little difficulty in communicat-
ing with each other whether in written or oral form. The situation, how-
ever, might be very different when the city dweller and the rural person
seek to communicate.
(b) A further factor involves the extent to which the communication
and the form in which it occurs involves specialized content and forms of
expression. This point can be illustrated by using examples drawn from
letter writing. Personal letters, one of the most common means of per-
sonal communication, are generally written in a straightforward manner
and vary in content and form depending upon the degree of familiarity
existing between the senders and receivers and the content to be commu-
nicated. As we all know, however, various types of letters require differ-
ent approaches to interpretation and exegesis. Most letters-say from a
friend or a parent-require little effort in understanding. A specialized
letter-say from a technician describing some mechanical or chemical
process or from an accountant explaining a bookkeeping procedure-is a
totally different matter. In a similar fashion, an essay on Paris in the
springtime would probably present fewer interpretive problems than an
essay on the influence of Renaissance architecture on nineteenth-century
constructions in Paris.
Complexity is introduced into the exegetical process by a number of
factors. (1) The first of these is what can be called the “third-party per-
spective.” Often in seeking to understand texts, the interpreter is not one
of the primary or original parties in the communication event. In this
case, the interpreter is neither the sender nor the receiver but a third party
who is, in a sense, an outsider, an observer, or even an intruder. Letters,
for example, are much more difficult to interpret when being read by a
third party. In such a situation, the parties to the original communication
Introducing Exegesis 9
may be totally unknown to the interpreter. Generally most documents
are best understood when the sender has some prior knowledge of the
receiver and the receiver has some prior acquaintance with the sender.
This makes it possible for the sender to hypothesize how the communi-
cation will be received and understood and thus shape and express the
communication accordingly. The receiver in like fashion can hypothe-
size about the sender so as to understand better both the content and the
shape of the communication. The third party must seek to understand the
communication by assuming the role of or by empathizing with both the
sender and the receiver. The interpreter must try to read the document
‘as if” the interpreter were both the sender and the receiver. This
requires the interpreter-the third party-to search out information
about both the sender and the receiver and their situations. When the
content or form of the document is very specialized, unique, or ambigu-
ous, this process is required to an even greater degree.
(2) A second complexity is introduced when the text or document is
composed in a language different from that of the interpreter or exegete.
Here a language barrier intrudes into the interpretive or exegetical pro-
cess. If an English speaking person wants to read a German language
textbook or receives a letter from a German, for example, the reader or
interpreter is confronted with special problems. The English interpreter
must either acquire sufficient knowledge of German to read the text or
resort to a translator who can aid in overcoming the language barrier.
Since each language has its own distinctive structure, grammatical fea-
tures, and vocabulary nuances, it is very difficult for an outsider 
toac-
quire the proficiency of the native. When translations are made they are
themselves already interpretations, since it is never possible for a trans-
lation to be an exact one-to-one transference from one language to
another. An interpretation of a translation is what might be called a
“second-level interpretation.’ ‘A first-level interpretation is the interpre-
tation made of the original, whether by a native speaker or hearer or by
one who has acquired knowledge of the original language. What appears
in a translation is the translator’s understanding of the original. The sec-
ond level of interpretation enters the picture when an interpreter seeks to
understand the content of the translation. Although translations help to
bridge the gap between one language and another, they can never do so
completely.
(3) A third factor which frequently must be taken into consideration in
the exegesis of texts is what might be called the “cultural gap.” Docu-
ments produced in one cultural context and exegeted in another cultural

--- Page 6 ---
10 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 11
,
context present certain problems to the interpreter. There are two rea-
sons for this. First of all, such a document may explicitly mention,
describe, or allude to special ideas, practices, and customs which would
be clearly understood by a person reading the document in the original
culture but which baffle a reader in a different culture. In the second
place, communication within a culture frequently assumes a shared body
of cultural understanding. This general reservoir of experience,
worldview, and perception which lies behind the text would not be
shared by the cultural outsider. A document, for example, reporting the
actions and outcome of a particular sporting event, say a baseball game
or a cricket match, would present difficulties in interpretation for a per-
son living in a culture where the sport and its rules of play were unknown
phenomena. This difference in cultures is not just related to ideas, con-
cepts, and worldviews. Also involved are differences in the way things
are said and written and the customary way of reading and interpreting.
In some cultures, for example, when one tells a story, the first character
to be mentioned is always the villain. Generally, the more remote and
different the culture presupposed and reflected in the document from that
of the interpreter, the greater the difficulty the exegete encounters in
interpreting the text.
(4) A fourth factor which can introduce perplexity in exegeting texts is
what can be called “the historical gap.” A person in the present study-
ing a document from the past is separated chronologically from the time
when the document was produced. The gap between the past and the
present does not have to be great in order to see this factor in operation
and to experience some of its consequences.
Reading a newspaper that is, let us say, fifty years old, can be a fasci-
nating and question-raising experience. One notices, for example, dif-
ferences from the present in clothing fashions, in prices for advertised
items, in issues that were the concerns of the day, in the manner in which
articles were written, and on and on. Questions arise immediately. Why
were things that way? Why were certain issues and events considered
important? How could prices be so low? How could people have thought
and reacted the way they did? When we read documents from the more
distant past-say from the days of ancient Greece and Rome-we often
encounter matters that are a “world apart” from the present-persons
and places, practices and perspectives, customs and conventions, and so
on. This is why editions of the ancient classics are often provided with
notes to explain historical facts and features that are anchored in the past
and no longer a part of the living present.
(5) A fifth factor that can complicate the exegetical process is the fact
that documents are sometimes the products of collective and historical
growth. This means that documents are, on occasion, not the product of
a single author nor even of one particular period of time. The United
States constitution, for example, was produced by a constitutional con-
vention and many figures contributed to its formation. In addition, the
original document has been added to in the form of amendments. We are
all familiar with different editions of textbooks. Often a textbook, writ-
ten by one author, will be revised by a second author so that it may no
longer be possible to distinguish original material from added material
unless we have access to the various editions. College and university
catalogues are representative of literature that has come into being
through growth and collective contributions. Much information in a cur-
rent catalogue may have been there since the first catalogue published by
the school. Other items may be the results of recent policy decisions. If a
researcher wished to explore the development of the school’s policies
and curriculum but possessed only the current catalogue, it would be a
formidable if not an impossible feat! By comparison of the catalogue
with information gained from other sources, it might be possible to
deduce some conclusions. For example, one could hypothesize when
courses in nuclear physics or liberation theology were introduced or
when coeducational dormitories became permissible.
In the ancient world, there was a far greater tendency for works to be
the product of collective growth than is currently the case. Even in medi-
eval times, writers often sought not to be original. Instead they fre-
quently edited and combined older works which, sometimes, were
themselves already edited and augmented works. This means that
ancient works were frequently the products of a long and complex edito-
rial process and contained layers or strata of materials and traditions.
The ancient Jewish historian, Josephus, for example, utilized assistants
in his writing, so that some of his works were really the product of a joint
effort. In addition, he frequently incorporated or rewrote sources with-
out acknowledging that he was actually doing this or informing the
reader about the sources being used. In defense of Josephus and many of
his ancient counterparts, however, it must be noted that this was fairly
common practice in those times before the rise of the modern interest in
authors and authorship and the development of copyright laws. The
results of this process of growth and historical development can occa-
sionally be seen in “seams”in the material, anachronisms in the text,
differences in style, and even contradictions in the contents. In the exe-

--- Page 7 ---
12 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 13
getical study of such documents, this character of the texts must be taken
into consideration.
One further consideration should be noted at this point about literary
productions in antiquity. Works were sometimes produced as if they
were the work of someone else, generally some venerable figure from
the past. A writer, at a later point in time, would produce a work and
attribute it to a person of the remote or recent past. Occasionally such
writers probably felt they were expressing what would have been the
thoughts of the one under whose name they wrote, maybe even preserv-
ing some authentic material. Sometimes such works were produced by
students or followers of important figures in order to pass on their
teacher’s or leader’s legacy. Works produced this way tended to be asso-
ciated with and attributed to the revered personality rather than to the
students or the followers since such works could embody the former’s
thought and the latter were generally less well-known. An example of
this would be the numerous philosophical treatises attributed to Aris-
totle, now known to be spurious and written many years after his death.
Occasionally persons followed this practice to give their works an
authoritative appeal. An example of this phenomenon can be seen in the
enormous amount of literature that was written under the name of Enoch
to whom the Bible gives only incidental notice (see Genesis 4:17-18;
5:18-24). None of these Enochian writings made their way into the
Scriptures although they are referred to in Jude 14-15. Generally the
nature of such works, called pseudepigraphs, can be discovered by ana-
lyzing the texts from literary, linguistic, and historical perspectives.
(6) A sixth factor which can contribute to complexity and difficulty in
the exegetical process is the existence of multiple and differing texts of
the same documents. Frequently two or more copies of a given docu-
ment exist but with lesser or greater differences between the copies. At
this point, the interpreter is confronted with the problem of determining
the actual wording of the text to be interpreted. Differences between
copies of the same work are much more common for ancient than for
modern works. The issue of divergent texts of the same work, however,
is not unknown even after the use of the printing press became wide-
spread in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. For example, many of the
plays of Shakespeare exist in significantly differing texts, so much so,
that the study of texts of Shakespeare’s plays has been a highly devel-
oped and controversial field. Before the use of the printing press, copies
of texts were always made by hand. Handcopying of any text of any
length generally results in varying numbers of mistakes-such as mis-
spellings, omitted words or units, repeated words or units, and so forth.
We possess few texts from antiquity in their original form, the so-called
autographs. Most often what we have are actually copies of copies of the
original. Since no one copy of any text of major size agrees exactly with
another copy of the same text, this requires the exegete to confront the
problem of the text in its original or authorial form.
The problem of multiple and differing texts of the same work can
become more complicated when differences between texts are also rep-
resented in several languages. If differences between various copies
exist but all the copies are in the same language, this presents the prob-
lem in one dimension. If there are diverging copies of the same work in
several languages, this adds another dimension. Copies of manuscripts
of Aristole’s works, for example, exist in Greek, Latin, and Arabic.
Where there are significant differences between these, the exegete must
work across language boundaries in order to try and discover what
appears to be the most likely reading.
(7) A seventh and final factor to be considered in noting the complexi-
ties that can develop in exegesis is the fact that some texts are considered
sacred and thus different in some fashion from all other works. To treat a
text as sacred in some sense involves more than treating it as good litera-
ture or as a classical work.
We are all familiar with the concept of the classical works of Western
literature reflected in introductory English literature anthologies. There
are certain well-accepted criteria by which literary works are recognized
as “classics.” Among these are the following: (a) a work must be well-
written and a good example of its genre; (b) it must engage isssues and
concerns that are reflective of recurring human conditions; and (c) it
must possess a quality which lends itself to multiple if not infinite inter-
pretability, that is, it must be open to diverse readings and
understandings.
A sacred text may possess some or all of the characteristics of a clas-
sic. Other dimensions enter the picture, however, when the work falls
into the category of the sacred. About classical works, people hold opin-
ions; about sacred texts, they hold convictions. Sacred texts belong to
the category of Scripture. There are several characteristics of “Scrip-
ture.” (a) Scripture possesses an authority for someone or some group
that exceeds normal conditions. This is true whether one is speaking
metaphorically about the fisher’s or hunter’s or stamp collector’s
“bible” or realistically about the Moslem Koran or the Jewish and
Christian Bibles. (b) As authoritative documents, Scriptures occupy an

--- Page 8 ---
14 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
official position in the life of the communities or groups that regard them
as Scripture. They are sources to which appeal is made and whose con-
tents inform in a special way the lives of certain communities and their
members. (c) Scriptures are understood as embodying a truer or better
reflection and understanding of reality than is the case with other writ-
ings. (d) Reality itself or the voice, thought, or word of God is believed
to be related to Scriptures in a way that is not true of other writings.
By their very nature, Scriptures bear special relationships to the com-
munities that consider them sacred. The communities have frequently
participated in their formation. Their sacredness is based on the fact that
communities have chosen to assign them a special place and a special
role. In addition, the manner in which the communities have understood
and interpreted their Scriptures becomes a decisive influence in how
they are assessed. Around Scriptures, there also develop assumptions
and systems of thought that are often taken for granted as being both the
result of the Scriptures’ interpretation and as the standard by which they
are to be interpreted or the lens through which they should be read.
Around Scriptures, there develops a tradition of both what the texts say
and how they are to be read. One who would exegete a sacred text thus
stands in some fashion within a tradition with a long history in which the
texts have interacted with the tradition and the tradition with the texts.
In this section, we have noted that exegesis is an activity in which all
people engage when they interpret oral and written texts. Secondly, we
noted that some conditions and texts require special efforts at interpreta-
tion and that exegesis can be a special discipline. Thirdly, we noted
some factors that can complicate the exegetical process and make neces-
sary certain special operations, special training, and special tools.
The Bible and Exegesis
Biblical exegesis belongs to the category of specialized exegesis.
Reading and understanding the Bible are undertakings different in
degree from reading and understanding a letter from a friend, an article
in a contemporary magazine, a newspaper account of some event, or a
modern novel or short story. The various complexities which can influ-
ence the exegetical process noted in the previous section are all related in
one way or another to biblical exegesis. Let us note how all seven of
these factors enter the picture in biblical exegesis.
(I) None of the Bible was originally addressed to the modern reader
and interpreter. None of us was involved in the original communication
Introducing Exegesis 15
events as either senders or receivers. Paul’s letters, for example, were
written to the Romans, the Galatians, the Corinthians, and others. The
modern interpreter, in the case of Paul, is therefore reading somebody
else’s mail. The books of Luke and Acts were accounts written for some-
one named Theophilus. These illustrations make clear that as students
interpreting biblical materials we are, in a sense, third-party intruders
and suffer from third-party perspectives.
(2) None of the Bible was originally composed in a modern language.
The Old Testament was written in Hebrew and Aramaic and the New
Testament in Greek. Even the modern Israeli who speaks Hebrew or the
modern Greek who speaks Greek recognizes that the languages of the
Bible are not the same as modern Hebrew and Greek. Thus all modern
exegetes, in interpreting the Bible, encounter the problem of a language
barrier.
(3) The modern readers of the Bible and the original readers of the
texts are separated by an enormous cultural gap. The culture presup-
posed by the Bible is that of the ancient Mediterranean world in general
and Palestine in particular. One has only to note a few general character-
istics of biblical culture to sense its difference from much modem cul-
ture. The social structures presupposed by the writers of biblical
materials were patriarchal and authoritarian. The dominant economic
system was agriculturally and village based. Diets were seasonal. Medi-
cal arts were primitive. Machines were little developed. Slavery was
widespread. General mortality, and especially infant mortality, rates
were high. Travel was slow and difficult. Life was rather simple and
characterized by stability and similarity rather than change. Human life
was oriented to the cycles of nature and climate. Entertainment was lim-
ited. Good artificial lighting did not exist. Animals were slaughtered,
dressed, and burned on altars as an integral part of worship. Divine
beings, both good and bad, were assumed to be participants in the ongo-
ing course of life and history.
(4) The historical gap that separates the present from the world of the
Bible ranges from almost twenty centuries to over three millennia. The
biblical traditions came into being during a period extending over twelve
centuries. These factors suggest two reasons why the exegete must
bridge this historical gap. First of all, the Bible originated within a con-
text chronologically far removed from the present. Secondly, since the
materials originated over such a long period of time, it becomes neces-
sary to understand the different historical contexts within which the vari-
ous books and traditions of the Bible came into being. In addition to

--- Page 9 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 17
these two considerations, there are two factors internal to the Bible itself
which demand historical attention on the part of the exegete. First, much
of the Bible takes the form of historical narrative. To call the Bible a
history book is a misleading simplifcation but it does point to the fact
that much of the material is concerned with historical matters. This phe-
nomenon cannot be ignored if one is to understand the Bible. Secondly,
much of the thought and theology of the Bible is expressed in terms of
past, present, and future, that is, in terms of a theology which both takes
seriously the course of historical events and is expressed in categories
dependent upon historical perspectives.
(5) The gradual growth of traditions and collective contributions to
documents are clearly evident in the Bible, especially the Old Testa-
ment. In fact, it is impossible to speak of particular authors of documents
in the Old Testament since we do not know who wrote a single book.
Instead, most of the works appear to have developed over lesser and
greater lengths of time and many persons probably contributed to their
formation. If we take Amos as a typical example of a prophetical book,
we can see the diversity of material in the book which makes it impossi-
ble to speak of Amos as the author. In the book, we find four types of
material. (a) A superscription provides some historical data about the
prophet (1:l). (b) Much of the book consists of oracles or speeches
attributed to the prophet (1:2-6:14;  W-14; 9:5-15). (c) Some material
is biographical, like the superscription, and speaks of the prophet in the
third person (7:10-17).  (d) Other material reports visions by the prophet
and appears to be autobiographical with the prophet referring to himself
in the first person (7:1-9; 8:1-3; 9:1-4). This diversity in the book sug-
gests that it was clearly an edited work produced by someone other than
the prophet himself. Practically all of the prophetic books manifest this
same type of diversity.
Another way of looking at the books as the product of collective
growth and authorship, in addition to the diversity in types of literary
material, is to note changes in content and perspective or differences in
historical conditions presupposed. Since the Middle Ages, scholars have
noted that the historical conditions, the style of the speeches, and the
content of Isaiah l-39 differ from Isaiah 40-66. The former presup-
poses a struggling state of Judah defending itself against the aggressive
and powerful Assyrian empire. The latter assumes that the Judeans are in
exile and that a faltering Babylonian empire is the major political power.
The former thus presupposes the historical conditions of the eighth cen-
tury B.C. and the latter those of the sixth century B.C. To exegete and
interpret the latter half of Isaiah as if it came from the eighth century
would be like interpreting a contemporary document as if it came from
the eighteenth century. The book of Isaiah, therefore, like many portions
of the Old Testament, must be viewed as an anthology of materials com-
ing from different periods.
(6) As with most documents from antiquity, the oldest manuscripts of
the Old and New Testaments we possess are copies made long after the
original documents were written. The oldest complete manuscript of the
Hebrew Bible dates from the Middle Ages (the copy was made in A.D.
1008). The oldest complete manuscript of the New Testament dates
from the fourth century A.D. About 5,000 different Greek manuscripts
or fragments of the New Testament are known. Of these, no two are
identical. The manuscript copies of the Hebrew Bible or parts thereof are
less numerous. In recent years, however, older fragments and almost
complete manuscripts of some books of the Old Testament have been
discovered in caves and other places in the Dead Sea region of Palestine.
Some of these show considerable differences from the standard Hebrew
texts.
Since the Bible was translated into other languages-such as Syriac,
Latin, and Coptic--quite early, these early versions also enter the pic-
ture in any attempt to determine the text of a passage or book. This is
particularly the case with the Old Testament which was translated into
Greek and Aramaic during the last centuries B.C. and the early centuries
A.D. In addition, the first five books of the Old Testament (the Penta-
teuch) also exist in an early Hebrew form known as Samaritan which dif-
fers frequently from the standard Hebrew text. All of this means, of
course, that textual studies in one form or another are indispensable in
biblical exegesis.
(7) That the Bible falls into the category of sacred Scripture needs no
special comment. Two matters, one positive and one negative, should be
noted. Positively, today’s biblical exegete has been preceded by centu-
ries of biblical study and interpretation which can be drawn upon for per-
spectives and insights. Negatively, the Bible as sacred Scripture has
been surrounded by tradition and traditional interpretations of various
sorts. The exegete is frequently tempted to read the text in light of the
tradition without any critical judgment or without letting the text speak
afresh and on its own. To do this is to engage in eisegesis, a “reading
into,” rather than exegesis, a “reading out of.”
The above considerations might seem to suggest that exegesis of the
Bible is a formidable if not impossible task. This might be the case if the

--- Page 10 ---
18 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Bible in its manuscript and translated forms were a newly discovered
ancient document and one had to approach its interpretation de nova-
that is, learn all the languages, prepare the tools, and do all the necessary
research. The biblical exegete, however, does not have to do this.
Thousands of others throughout the centuries have interpreted the Bible,
prepared tools available to the contemporary interpreter, and developed
methods of approaching the problems and issues involved. Probably no
other book has been so studied as the Bible, and tools for such study
have been prepared by scholars who have spent their lives engaged in
biblical exegesis and interpretation.
Biblical Exegesis Through the Centuries
,
From their earliest days, the synagogue and the church have engaged
in the exegesis of their Scriptures. As believing communities with a
body of sacred literature, Judaism and Christianity have continuously
sought to understand their Scriptures, to explain their contents, to appro-
priate their meaning, and to apply and embody their teaching. The man-
ner in which this has been done has varied throughout history. In some
respects, however, the history of Judaism and Christianity can be
t viewed as the history of their interpretation of the Scriptures. Their
understanding of the task of interpretation and how this task was to be
carried out reflects much about the communities’ self-consciousness and
their relationship to the culture and thought within which they have
found themselves.
Very broadly speaking, the history of biblical exegesis may be
divided into three major periods with each of these reflecting particular
interests and characteristics. These are (1) the early and medieval
period, (2) the period of the Reformation with its roots in late medieval
Jewish scholarship and the Renaissance, and (3) the modem period char-
acterized by the attempt to work out clearly defined methods and pro-
grams of exegesis. Any such historical scheme must be understood,
however, as an oversimplification of a much more complex situation.
(1) The early phase of biblical interpretation was characterized by the
assumption that the faith and practices of the communities were identical
with and directly authorized by the teachings of the Bible. The faith and
practices of the communities were considered divinely ordained. Simi-
larly, the Bible was considered divinely given. Thus, it was presumed
that the Bible taught what the communities believed and practiced. Intcr-
prcters of the Bible bclievcd thcmsclves to bc discerning and
Introducing Exegesis 19
expounding the will and mind of God as these had been given to the bib-
lical writers and embodied in the texts. Everything in the Bible--even
difficulties and problems in the text---could be assumed to be revelation.
One rabbi advised: “Search it and search it, for everything is in it.”
Ancient interpreters recognized that biblical exegesis was a special-
ized discipline and discussed methods and rules for its interpretation.
Rabbi Hillel (d. beginning of the first century A.D.) formulated seven
rules for interpreting Scripture and for arguing from Scripture to legal
conclusions. These were expanded to thirteen by Rabbi Ishmael in the
second century and were subsequently modified and enlarged. The
Christian scholar, Tyconius (d. about 400), also drew up seven rules to
be used in understanding biblical texts.
Generally, however, the theology of the communities and the interpret-
ers determined the results of the exegesis and interpretation of the Scrip-
tures in this early period. This was especially the case with the Christian
use of the Old Testament. In describing methods for interpreting the
Bible, Saint Augustine (d. 430), for example, argued the following:
“Every student of the Divine Scriptures must exercise himself, having
found nothing else in them except, first,  that God is to be loved for Him-
self, and his neighbor for the sake of God; second, that he is to love God
with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his mind; and third, that he
should love his neighbor as himself, that is, so that all love for our neigh-
bor should, like all love for ourselves, be referred to God.” If a text did
not teach this, it was not to be interpreted at face value: “Whatever
appears in the divine Word that does not literally pertain to virtuous
behavior or to the truth of faith you must take to be figurative.” This often
meant ignoring the “precise meaning which the author . . . intends to
express.” He further advised his readers that “when investigation reveals
an uncertainty. . . the rule of faith should be consulted as it is found in the
more open places of Scripture and in the authority of the Church.”
When Augustine talked about taking texts “figuratively,” he was
referring to the practice of finding a hidden or secondary meaning
behind the actual statements and words of Scripture. This practice of
finding levels of meanings within texts was widely used in the ancient
world. The Stoics had employed such allegorical interpretation so that
ancient texts, such as Homer, could be read in a manner that would
explain away the unacceptable features in a text and allow the “reading
in” of acceptable philosophical and ethical ideas. This approach was
greatly developed in the Egyptian city of Alexandria and was applied to
the Old Testament by the Jewish exegete Philo (d. about A.D. 50).

--- Page 11 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 21
The Christian scholar Origen (d. about 254) argued that all biblical
texts could have more than one meaning “for just as man consists of
body, soul and spirit, so in the same way does the scripture.” Some
texts, he concluded, since their straightforward meaning did not agree
with standard theology or ethics, “have no bodily sense at all, (and)
there are occasions when we must seek only for the soul and the spirit, as
it were, of the passage.” All texts could thus be taken as having a spe-
cial, secondary spiritual (symbolic, typological, or allegorical) meaning
and at times the straightforward meaning could be totally ignored.
This approach could be applied not only to difficult and unedifying
texts but also could be used to allegorize other texts. The classical
example of this is Augustine’s analysis of the parable of the Good
Samaritan (Luke 10:29-37).  Augustine said the man who went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho refers to Adam. Jerusalem is the heavenly
city of peace from whose blessedness Adam fell. Jericho means the
moon and stands for human mortality, for the moon is born, waxes,
wanes, and dies. The thieves who attacked Adam are the devil and his
angels. They stripped him of his immortality and beat him by persuad-
ing him to sin. They left him half dead. The priest and the Levite who
passed the man by without helping him are the priesthood and ministry
of the Old Testament which cannot bring salvation. The term Samari-
tan is taken to mean Guardian, so it refers to Jesus himself. The bind-
ing of the wounds is the restraint of sin. Oil is the comfort of good hope
and wine is the exhortation to work with fervent spirit. The beast on
which the man was placed signifies the flesh in which Christ appeared
among men. Being set on the beast means belief in the incarnation of
Christ. The inn to which the man is taken is the church where persons
are refreshed on their pilgrimage of return to the heavenly city. The
two pieces of money that the good Samaritan gave to the innkeeper are
the promise of this life and of that to come or else the two main sacra-
ments. The innkeeper is the Apostle Paul.
Not everyone in the early church favored seeking multiple meanings
in the interpretation of the text. A group of interpreters, the so-called
‘r school of Antioch, advocated a more literal and straightforward reading
of the material. They argued that a typological or prophetic reading of an
Old Testament text should be engaged in only when it did not do vio-
lence to the staightforward meaning.
Eventually, the practice of finding multiple meanings in texts domi-
nated. The standard practice throughout most of the Middle Ages was to
exegete so as to discover four meanings in a text: (a) the literal (or
straightforward or historical) meaning, (b) the allegorical (or spiritual-
ized or symbolic) meaning, (c) the tropological  (or moral or ethical)
meaning, and (d) the anagogical (or eschatological or heavenly) mean-
ing. A short medieval Latin poem gave expression to this approach:
The letter shows us what God and our fathers did;
The allegory shows us where our faith is hid;
The moral meaning gives us rules of daily life;
The anagogy shows us where we end our strife.
Jewish exegesis tended to adhere somewhat more closely to the straight-
forward meaning. This was encouraged by Judaism’s less philosophical
theology and a greater desire to follow the explicit edicts and teachings !
of the biblical texts. Nonetheless, even Jewish exegesis devised a four-
fold interpretation of texts: (a) p&at (the plain meaning), (b)remez
(allusion or allegory), (c) derash (the homiletical), and (d) sod (the mys-
tical or secret).
(2) In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, important shifts of per-
spective occurred in biblical interpretation and exegesis. The impetus for
some of these shifts came from Jewish scholarship of the eleventh and
twelfth centuries. Scholars like Ibn Ezra (d. 1167) and Rashi (d. 1105)
stressed the grammatical aasis of texts which had as its goal the eluci-
dation of the plain meaning (peshat)  of texts. Renaissance scholars of 4
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries rediscovered early classical tradi-
tion and texts, and they formulated approaches for their interpretation.
(a) Interpretation broke with the desire to find multiple meanings in
biblical texts while holding to the inspiration of the Scriptures. Martin
Luther (d. 1546), for example, declared: “The Holy Spirit is the plainest
writer and speaker in heaven and earth, and therefore His words cannot
have more than one, and that the very simplest, sense, which we call the
literal, ordinary, natural, sense. ’ ’
(b) There was a break with traditional interpretation as the best means
of understanding texts. Throughout the Middle Ages, interpretation
often meant nothing more than noting what the church fathers and major
authorities had said about a text. The new impetus tended to bypass tra-
dition in hopes of allowing the texts to speak on their own.
(c) Translations into the common languages meant a break with the
Christian custom of using the Bible only in Latin. This development
raised the problem of which text was to be used in making translations
and stimulated the study of Hebrew and Greek as well as the printing of
texts in the original biblical languages.

--- Page 12 ---
22 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Introducing Exegesis 23
(d) The freedom granted interpreters in Protestantism,  rather than pro-
ducing the unanimity of opinion that the reformers had rather naively
assumed would result, led instead to a multitude of opinions all believed
to be based on sound exegesis and interpretation. Quickly it became
obvious that the theological stance and historical situation of the inter-
preters played an important role in exegesis.
(e) The development of secular learning-philosophy, science, and
general humanistic thought-meant that the Bible was no longer taken
as the final authority on many matters. Reason came to occupy an impor-
tant role in human culture and came into conflict with worldviews and
systems of thought based on the Bible, revelation, and tradition.
(f) Historical perspectives on all matters, including the Bible, became
an important factor. In the medieval world, the past and present tended
to blend into a unified whole. There was little sense of the past as past.
The past was viewed as an earlier expression of the present. With the
development of history as a discipline, the chronological and cultural
gaps between the present and the past became more and more obvious.
With this came the recognition that the Bible was a book anchored in the
past both in origin and in outlook.
(3) The modem period of biblical interpretation, extending from the
Enlightenment to the present, may be said to be characterized by one
general overall aim: to study and understand the biblical documents as
one would any other set of documents from antiquity. Issues such as the
historical setting of both the biblical documents and their writers and the
role and function of the biblical materials in their original contexts came
to the forefront alongside the analysis of their contents. This does not
mean that the Bible was not examined for its religious value nor that it
was no longer viewed as revelatory material. What happened was that
the Bible came to be studied for a variety of reasons and was subjected to
a variety of methodological approaches. The Bible could be studied as
the means to a number of goals. It could be studied to reconstruct the
history and religion of Israel and the early church. It could be studied as
the literary remains of early cultures. It could be studied as the founda-
tion documents of two great movements-Judaism and Christianity. It
could be studied for its aesthetic and artistic values. These, and other
interests, took their place alongside study of the Bible for its religious
values and theological insights. The exegetical approaches and proce-
dures which developed to facilitate all of these interests will be the con-
cm of subsequent chapters in this handbook.
The Task of Biblical Exegesis
Exegesis is best thought of as a systematic way of interpreting a text.
As noted earlier, everyone engages in exegesis in one form or another,
but biblical exegesis has its own specialized needs and disciplines. Its
goal, however, is quite simple: to reach an informed understanding of
the text. This is different from saying that the exegete seeks to determine
the meaning of the text. The fact is, there are various aspects of a text’s
meaning and different types of exegesis can address these different
aspects. For this reason, the exegete can never hope to present the exege-
sis of a passage as if it were the final word. Rather, one does an exegesis
of a passage in which a coherent, informed interpretation is presented,
based on one’s encounter with and investigation of a text at a given point
in time.
To insist on the distinction between “understanding a text” and
“establishing the meaning of a text” recognizes that an interpreter
never fully comprehends a text, especially at one sitting or even at the
end of an intensive investigation. This is the reason that exegesis is an
ongoing process. It never ceases. Even if one has read a text dozens,
even hundreds of times, there will always be dimensions of the text
which may come to life in new ways or will be seen from new angles.
Exegesis does not allow us to master the text so much as it enables us
to enter it.
One way to think about the exegetical task is to conceive of it as leam-
ing to interrogate the text. To be sure, the interpreter may not always
come to a text with a set of formulated questions, but as one reads a text
questions do begin to emerge and intuitions take shape. Doing exegesis
requires us to know, first of all, that there are different kinds of questions
we can put to a text, and second, which kinds of questions to ask for
different purposes. In other words, there are a number of approaches to
the study of a text and a number of methods that can be employed to
interrogate a text.
We can demonstrate the multiple aspects of exegesis by drawing on a
parallel from the study of linguistics. Modem communication theory has
developed what is called the “communication triangle” to illustrate the
various factors involved in the communication process. The following is
a very simplified version of this triangle:

--- Page 13 ---
24 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
(1) Sender (2) Receiver
(4) Signal
(3) The World of Reality
In this diagram the sender represents the speaker, writer, artist, or
whoever is the originator of communication. The receiver is the audi-
ence, listener, hearer, reader, or whoever becomes part of the particu-
lar communication process. The world of reality denotes the universe
of objects, ideas, and meanings, which are shared in some way by both
the sender and receiver and make communication possible. The signal
is the means of communication; for the artist it is the work, for a writer
it is the text.
A similar schematic diagram constructed and widely used to illustrate
the relationship of various literary-critical theories parallels the above
communication triangle. This second diagram is as follows:
(3) Universe
(4) Work
/\
(1) Author (2) Audience
If we apply the first model to biblical interpretation, a resulting trian-
gle would look like this:
(1) Originator(s)
Introducing Exegesis 25
(2) Audience(s)
(4) Biblical Text
(3) Universe of Ideas and Events
The originator(s) of the biblical text may be an author(s), an editor(s),
a redactor, or the community. The audience(s) may be the original or
subsequent hearers or readers. The universe of ideas is the shared world
of thoughts, perspectives, and understandings that make communication
possible and are mirrored and embodied in the text. The text is the
medium of communication that may have originally been oral in form
but moved to and now encounters us in written form.
In terms of the second diagram above, the relationships in biblical
interpretation may be diagrammed as follows:
(3) Universe of Ideas and Events
(4) Biblical Text
/\
(1) Author (2) Reader
The various issues and problems that confront the modern exegete of
the text may be viewed in terms of whether the questions we ask focus on
one or the other of the components of the model and whether we are con-
cerned with the original or the subsequent components in the process.
That is, we can interrogate the text in terms of the author’s initial com-

--- Page 14 ---
26 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
munication, the text’s (hypothetical) original shape, the original audi-
ence’s hearing, understanding, and reception of the communication, and
so on. Or we may ask questions about later forms of the text, later audi-
ences, and later understandings realizing we ourselves are now an audi-
ence, reading the text in an even later form (generally in translation, for
example), and in the context of a universe of ideas that, at least superfi-
cially, may differ significantly from those shared by the original partici-
pants in the process or those held by subsequent participants in the life of
the text.
We do well to remember that the various techniques of biblical criti-
cism have been developed as interpreters have sought to answer partic-
ular kinds of questions and to solve particular kinds of problems. In the
remainder of this book, we will be discussing the various ways of
addressing the questions and problems modern students and interpret-
ers encounter when exegeting the biblical text. The choice is not arbi-
trary. There is a broad consensus about the kinds of questions to ask,
the problems to be encountered, and the methods to be employed. This
consensus is the result of centuries of biblical interpretation. Debates
still continue about the relative merits of certain types of questions,
and they will continue, as they should. Nevertheless, genuine gains in
our understanding of the Bible have been made through the use and
application of these methods and we should not pretend that we know
less than we do. Biblical science has made significant advances, just as
has every other field of scientific inquiry. The variety of methods to be
discussed merely attests to the richness and diversity of the biblical
documents and these methods should be seen as complementary. No
single way of approaching a text should be seen as exhausting the
meaning of a passage, but rather as a way of dealing with particular
facets of a passage.
Each of these approaches is treated as a type of “criticism.” This is a
technical expression used by scholars to denote a field of study which
has developed fairly clearly defined principles and techniques. “Criti-
cism” derives from the Greek word krinein, meaning “to judge” or “to
discern,” and denotes the process through which discerning judgments
are made. A literary critic is one who studies literary documents attempt-
ing to make intelligent and informed judgments about them. In the end,
such judgments may be negative or positive, complimentary or uncom-
plimentary, but “criticism” per se is a neutral term. Biblical criticism,
as a broad category, encompasses many sub-disciplines and a wide vari-
ety of interpretive activities which seek to make discerning judgments
Introducing Exegesis 27
about the Bible. As such, “being critical” need not mean “being
destructive,” nor “being constructive” for that matter.
Most of the questions and problems which arise when modem readers
engage in exegesis may be classified under one or more of the types of
criticism. When a reader discovers an alternative wording within a text
and wonders what the orginal wording or what the earliest form of a par-
ticular reading might have been, these are the fundamental problems
with which textual criticism deals. One must determine what the word-
ing of the text to be exegeted is. For this reason, the task of textual criti-
cism is often one of the issues an exegete encounters.
In addition to issues concerning the wording of the passage under con-
sideration, another set of questions arises which has to do with the text’s
setting in time and space-that is, its historical, geographical, and cul-
tural setting or the context of the original author(s) and audience(s). As
noted earlier, if certain customs, events, places, and names are referred
to in the text and these are unfamiliar to the reader, they will need to be
clarified before understanding results. Not only do matters referred to in
the text itself require such clarification, but the history and setting of the
text as well. Determining the period, geographical locale, and author-
ship of the document can be equally important. Such questions as these
fall under the rubric of historical criticism.
Grammatical criticism includes all attempts to answer questions per-
taining to the language of the text. This includes both the words them-
selves, either alone or in phrases, as well as the way in which the words
are put together or the syntax of the sentence or paragraph. Rules of
grammar in effect at the time the passage was written may also need to
be examined if it appears that meaning and understanding depend upon
resolving grammatical issues.
Concern with the style, character, compositional techniques, and rhe-
torical patterns constitutes the field of literary criticism. (Frequently, in
biblical studies, literary criticism has been too narrowly identified with
source analysis, which comprises only one aspect of literary criticism.)
Such matters as the location of a passage within larger literary units and
how the passage functions within these larger units are often quite cru-
cial in understanding and interpreting a text. Since most of the biblical
documents were originally oral in form or else written to be read aloud
and were intended to persuade a listening audience, ancient authors like
ancient orators were ordinarily intentional and careful about how they
put together and arranged their compositions. Thus the rhetorical fea-
tures of a text must be given careful consideration.

--- Page 15 ---
28 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
If literary criticism deals with how the passage is structured and how it
relates to its larger literary unit, form criticism is more narrowly con-
cerned with the passage itself or with sub-units in a passage. Special
attention is given to the literary form or genre of the passage, for exam-
ple, whether it is a parable, a prophetic speech, a hymn, and so forth.
Attention to these questions has arisen because of the recognition that
form and meaning are directly related; one reads a poem one way, a
piece of prose another. The Bible contains a rich diversity of literary
forms and genres and many of these already existed prior to their actual
appearance in the biblical text. For this reason, questions of the original
setting of particular literary forms and genres are also crucial as one
seeks to determine the “life situation” of a passage.
It is now widely recognized that the Bible, in many of its parts, resem-
bles an anthology of sacred writings where revered stories, traditions,
and sayings uttered by individuals and preserved by various communi-
ties have been collected, edited, and formed into a single text. This
means that some texts have a “pre-history,” by which is meant that they
were actually spoken or written, preserved and transmitted much earlier
than their incorporation into the biblical text itself. Efforts to uncover the
earlier stages of development through which a text has passed are dealt
with under tradition criticism.
Even though a text might have a pre-history, the reader finds it located
within a specific biblical writing. Thus the interpreter will also want to
ask how the author(s) or editor(s) intended a passage to be understood in
its final literary form. Reduction criticism focuses on the final form of
the passage and on the changes or redactions it may have undergone in
the editorial process. It assesses the significance of these editorial
changes and reshapings, which may have occurred in the various written
stages prior to and including its final form.
The biblical text, like any other, may be read and interpreted purely as
a text without regard to such historically oriented matters as the text’s
origins, the author’s intention, and the original audience. Such an
approach focuses on the structure and meaning of the text in light of uni-
versal concerns and factors, as these are encountered in and brought to
the text by the reader. Structural criticism, as this approach is called, has
recently been borrowed from general criticism and applied to biblical
texts. Such criticism seeks to explain how meaning is structured into a
text, to understand how a reader comprehends a text, and to discover
how universal structures of thought open the text to the reader.
Over the centuries, the Bible has been and continues to be read as
Introducing Exegesis 29
sacred Scripture. As Scripture, the Bible, in varying forms, constitutes a
canon for Jewish and Christian communities of faith. Canonical criti-
cism explores how the Scriptures were transmitted and shaped by believ-
ing communities to produce a canon and how texts are to be read and
understood as parts of a collection of sacred writings.
By arranging these various aspects of the exegetical process in this
order, we do not mean to suggest that exegesis is a mechanical undertak-
ing which one can accomplish in a stair-step order as if one method or
stage of exegesis always leads to the next. Normally, questions may
arise from the text in an unsystematic order, depending on the nature of
the text. For example, an interpreter may be puzzled first by literary or
historical features of a text and only later discover that an important tex-
tual variant within the passage needs to be clarified. Even though ques-
tions may arise from the text in a somewhat random fashion, they need
not be pursued randomly. Instead, the interpreter will discover that fairly
systematic ways of tackling various exegetical questions do exist and
that they may be pursued to achieve good results.
Generally speaking, the exegetical task may be said to fall into two
fairly clearly defined stages: analysis and synthesis. As the interpreter
begins the task of exegesis, examining different aspects of the passage,
whether they are historical, grammatical, literary, or whatever, will
serve as a way of “breaking down” the passage into its component parts
and problems and examining them as discrete units and issues. These
separate analytic tasks will normally interlock for each will inform the
other. As analysis takes place, the interpreter’s understanding of the pas-
sage will gradually increase and the groundwork will be laid for synthe-
sis. By synthesis, we mean the process by which the interpreter again
“puts together” the text. Here, the task is to relate the preliminary ana-
lytical investigations to each other, weighing the significance of each,
and deciding how they contribute to the overall interpretation.
As exegesis takes place, the interpreter will discover that exegesis
has both a positive and negative function. Positively, the interpreter
will be able to establish certain matters about the text that were previ-
ously unknown or uncertain, and as a result, the exegetical task pro-
duces new knowledge, at least for the interpreter. Negatively, the
interpreter may succeed in determining only what the text cannot
mean. Quite often, the most productive part of exegesis is uncover-
ing “false understandings” or ways of looking at the text which do
not conform to the evidence and insight discovered in an examination
of the text through the exegetical process. To put it another way, the

--- Page 16 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
exegete may succeed only in drawing further limits around the pas-
sage or in narrowing the concentric circles of meaning and interpreta-
tion which have grown up around the text in the history of
interpretation. Although this may cause the interpreter to become
more modest, it is scarcely a negligible accomplishment.
In every case, the interpreter will soon discover that, although
employing the tools, methods, and findings of well-developed disci-
plines, such as lexicography, textual criticism, and historical analysis,
exegesis is nevertheless an art as well as a science. It requires both imag-
ination and creativity, not only in learning how to put questions to a text,
but also in learning how to answer them, and above all in synthesizing
these answers into a coherent, meaningful interpretation of the passage.
Contrary to popular opinion, however, one can learn to be an artist as
well as a scientist.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(Items marked with an asterisk are especially recommended as additional reading for
beginning students.)
Bibliographies
Bollier, J., The Literature of Theology: A Guidefor Students and Pastors (Phila-
delphia: Westminster Press, 1979).
*Childs, B. S., Old Testament Books for Pastor and Teacher (Philadelphia:
Westminster Press, 1977).
Danker, F. W., Multipurpose Toolsfor  Bible Study (3d ed.; St. Louis: Concor-
dia Publishing House, 1970).
*Fitzmyer,  J. A., An Introductory Bibliography for the Study of Scripture (rev.
ed.; Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1981).
France, R. T., A Bibliographical Guide to New Testament Research (3d ed.;
Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1979).
Hurd, J. C., Jr., A Bibliography of New Testament Bibliographies (New York:
Seabury  Press, 1966).
Marrow, S. B., Basic Tools of Biblical Exegesis (Rome: Biblical Institute Press,
1978).
*Martin, R. P., New Testament Books for Pastor and Teacher (Philadelphia:
Westminster Press, 1984).
Scholer, D. M., A Basic Bibliographic Guide for New Testament Exegesis (2d
ed.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1973).
Wagner, G. (ed.), An Exegetical Bibliography of the New Testament (Macon:
Mercer University Press, 1982-).
Biblical Exegesis
*Barton, J., Reading the Old Testament: Method in Biblicul Study (London/Phil-
adelphia: Darton, Longman and Todd/Westminster Press,  1984).
Introducing Exegesis 31
Barton, J., “Classifying Biblical Criticism ” in Journal for the Study in Old
Testament 29 (1984) 19-35.
Blackman, E. C., “The Task of Exegesis” in The Background of the New Testa-
ment and Its Eschatology (ed. by W. D. Davies and D. Daube; London: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1964) 3-26.
Brown, R. E., Biblical Exegesis and Church Doctrine (New York: Paulist Press,
1985).
Bultmann, R., “Is Exegesis Without Presuppositions Possible?” in New Testa-
ment and Mythology and Other Basic Writings: Rudolf Bultmann (ed. by S.
M. Ogden; Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1984/1985)
145-53.
Carson, D. A., Exegetical Fallacies (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1984).
Cullmann, O., “The Necessity and Function of Higher Criticism” in The Early
Church (ed. by A. J. B. Higgins; London/Philadelphia: SCM PresslWest-
minster Press, 1956) 3-16.
Doty, W. G., Contemporary New Testament Interpretation (Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall, 1972).
Fee, G. D., New Testament Exegesis: A Handbook for Students and Pastors
(Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983).
*Furnish, V. P., “Some Practical Guidelines for New Testament Exegesis” in
Perkins School of Theology Journal 26 (1973) 1-16.
Kaiser, 0. and W. G. Kiimmel,  Exegetical Method: A Student’s Handbook (rev.
ed.; New York: Seabury Press, 1981).
Kaiser, W. C., Toward an Exegetical Theology: Biblical Exegesisfor Preaching
and Teaching (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1981).
*Keck, L. E. and G. M. Tucker, “Exegesis” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1976) 296-303.
Malherbe, A. J., “An Introduction: The Task and Method of Exegesis ” in Res-
toration Quarterly 5 (1961) 169-78.
Marshall, I. H. (ed.), New Testament Interpretation: Essays on Principles and
Methods (Exeter/Grand  Rapids: Paternoster PresslEerdmans  Publishing Com-
pany, 1977/1978).
Mays, J. L., Exegesis as a Theological Discipline (Richmond: Union Theologi-
c-al Seminary, 1960).
Reumann, J., “Methods in Studying the Biblical Text Today” in Concordia
Theolo&% Monthly 40 ( 1969)65%8  1.
Stuart, D., Old Testament Exegesis: A Primer for Students and Pastors (rev.
ed.; Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1984).
Yoder, P., From Word to Life: A Guide to the Art of Bible Study (Scottdale, PAI
Kitchener, ONT: Herald Press, 1982).
History of Biblical Interpretation
Ackroyd, P. R. et al. (eds.), Cambridge History of the Bible (3 ~01s.; London/
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1963-1970).
Benson, J. E., “The History of the Historical-Critical Method in the Church ”
in Dialog 12 (1973) 94-103.
Blackman, E. C., Biblicul Interpretation (London/Philadelphia: Independent
Press/Westminster Press, 1957).

--- Page 17 ---
32 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Bovon, F. and G. Rouiller, Exegesis: Problems of Method and Exercises in
Reading (Genesis 22 and Luke 1.5) (Pittsburgh/Edinburgh: Pickwick Press/T.
& T. Clark, 1978).
Bruce, F. F., “The History of New Testament Study ” in I. H. Marshall (ed.),
New Testament Interpretation, pp. 21-59.
*Clements,  R. E., One Hundred Years of Old Testament Interpretation = A
Century of Old Testament Study (rev. ed.; Philadelphia/London: Westminster
Press/Lutterworth Press, 1983).
Ebeling, G., “The Significance of the Critical Historical Method for Church and
Theology in Protestantism” in his Word and Faith (Philadelphia/London:
Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1963) 17-61.
Evans, G. R., The Language and Logic of the Bible: The Earlier Middle Ages
(Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
Evans, G. R., The Language and Logic of the Bible: The Road to Reformation
(Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Fishbane, M., Biblical Interpretation in Ancient Israel (Oxford/New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986).
Froehlich,  K., Biblical Interpretation in the Early Church (PhiladeIphia:  For-
tress Press, 1985).
*Grant, R. M., with D. Tracy, A Short History of the Interpretation of the Bible
(rev. ed.; Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1984).
“Greenspahn,  F. E. (ed.), Scripture in the Jewish and Christian Traditions:
Authority, Interpretation, Relevance (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1982).
Hahn, H. F., The Old Testament in Modern Research (2d ed.; Philadelphia/
London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1966).
Henry, P., New Directions in New Testament Study (Philadelphia/London:
Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1979).
Krentz, E., The. Historical-Critical Method (Philadelphia/London: Fortress
Press/SPCK, 1975).
Kiimmel, W. G., The New Testament: The History of the Investigation of Its
Problems (Nashville/London: Abingdon Press/SCM Press, 1972).
Kugel, J. L. and R. A. Greer, Early Biblical Interpretation (Philadelphia/
London: Westminster Press/SPCK, 1986/1987).
*Neill,  S., The Interpretation of the New Testament, 1861-1961  (London/New
York: Oxford University Press, 1964).
Reventlow, H. G., The Authority of the Bible and the Rise of the Modern World
(London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1984).
Rogers, J. B. and D. K. McKim, The Authority and Interpretation of the Bible:
An Historical Approach (San Francisco/London: Harper & Row, 1979).
Rogerson, J., Old Testament Criticism in the Nineteenth Century: England and
Germany (London/Philadelphia: SPCK/Fortress  Press, 1984).
Smalley, B., The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages (rev. ed.; Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1964).
Weingreen, J. et al., “Interpretation, History of” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of
the Bible, Supplementary Volume, 436-56.
Wood, J. D., The Interpretation of the Bible (London: Gerald Duckworth & Co.
Ltd., 1958).
CHAPTER 2
TEXTUAL
CRITICISM:The Quest for the Original Wording
When studying a biblical text, the interpreter frequently encounters
different wordings, or variant readings, for the same passage. This may
be noticed when one reads the same passage in different translations. For
example, reading the story of the conversion of the Ethiopian nobleman
in Acts 8 in the King James Version, one notices the nobleman’s confes-
sion given in verse 37. Reading the same account in the Revised Stan-
dard Version, one discovers that the confession is missing from the text.
Instead, it is placed in a footnote and prefaced with the remark: “Other
ancient authorities add all or most of verse 37.”
Variant wordings of a passage may also be noticed if one is working
with a single translation, particularly if it is an edition of one of the
major committee translations of the Bible, such as the Revised Stan-
dard Version (RSV ), The New English Bible (NEB), The Jerusalem
Bible (JB), the New Jewish Version (NJV), The New International Ver-
sion (NIV), or the New American Bible (NAB). Reading a passage in
such a modern edition, the interpreter may be referred to a footnote and
be met with a list of symbols and abbreviations. For example, in the
RSV , in the text of Micah 1:5, one reads: “And what is the sin of the
housea of Judah.7” In the footnote indicated by, the supralinear “a,”
one reads: “Gk Tg Compare Syr: Heb what are the high places.” This
indicates that the wording given in the translation is taken from the
Greek translation (Gk) and the Targums  (Tg; Aramaic translations)
and is similar to what is found in the Syriac translation (Syr) although
the Hebrew reads what are the high places. Or, in reading Genesis
10:5, the reader is referred to a note which says: “Compare verses 20,
31. Heb lacks These are the sons of Japheth.” This footnote indicates
that the added material does not appear in the Hebrew nor in any
ancient translation but has been added by the translators on the

--- Page 18 ---
34 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
assumption that this statement, by analogy with verses 20 and 31, had
dropped out of the text. Notations such as these appear frequently
enough in modern translations of the Bible for the interpreter to ask:
what accounts for these variations of wording within a text? which of
the variants represents the original reading? or, can one even deter-
mine the original wording of a text?
An understanding of the nature of our earliest biblical manuscripts can
help one to appreciate why such notations occur, what they mean, and
how to use them. None of the original manuscripts, or autographs, of
any biblical writing has been preserved. For that matter, so far as we
know, not even first or secondhand copies of any of the original manu-
scripts have survived. What has survived are copies of copies, handwrit-
ten by scribes. Some of these copies are more ancient than others, but
the oldest are usually copies of individual books or only fragments or
parts of books. The oldest surviving manuscript of a portion of the Old
Testament so far discovered dates from the third century B.C., while the
earliest extant New Testament manuscript is a fragment from the Gospel
of John dating from the early second century A.D. This means that, with
respect to every single biblical writing, there exists a chronological gap
between the original manuscript writtenby a biblicai~author or compiled
by an editor and the earliest preserved copy. Thus, it is probably an illu-
sion to assume that we can ever recover with certainty the “original”
wording of a biblical text.
Thousands of copies of biblical writings, however, have been pre-
served from ancient times. Some of these are complete manuscripts con-
taining the entire Hebrew Old Testament or Greek New Testament or
major portions of each. Many others are manuscripts of individual
books. Still others are manuscripts containing only portions of single
books. No two of these manuscripts, however, are identical in every
detail.
As early as the third century B.C., the Old Testament began to be
translated into Greek and later was translated into other languages,
including Syriac and Latin. The New Testament also, shortly after it was
written, began to be translated, first into Syriac, later into Latin. It also
appeared in other lesser known languages, such as Coptic, an Egyptian
dialect. Often manuscripts of these translations, even in the same lan-
guage, differ significantly from one another.
In addition, the contents of some ancient translations of Old Testa-
ment materials differ radically from Hebrew manuscripts. For example,
the Hebrew version of Job is one-sixth longer than the Greek version and
Textual Criticism 35
the Greek version of Jeremiah is about one-eighth shorter than the
Hebrew version with much of the material appearing in a different order.
Because of the popularity of the biblical writings, they were often
quoted in commentaries and other written works which dealt with bibli-
cal topics. Often such quotations differ from one another and from
known manuscripts in the original and translated languages.
Thus we possess four types of textual variants for biblical materials:
(1) variations among manuscripts in the original languages, (2) varia-
tions among manuscripts in early translations, (3) variations between
ancient manuscripts in the original languages and manuscripts of early
translations, and (4) variant quotations in early Jewish and Christian
writings.
Once the student understands not only how ancient writings were
originally composed but also how they were copied, preserved, trans-
mitted, translated and quoted, it is easier to understand how and why
such variations in the wording of a biblical passage could result.
Many of the varying quotations in rabbinical and early Christian liter-
ature arose because writers were frequently quoting from memory)
Major differences between early translations and original-language man-
uscripts, as in the case of Job and Jeremiah, probably resulted because
different textual traditions or different versions of these books lie behind
the surviving Greek and Hebrew texts. In some cases, the Greek texts
may be closer to the original than the known Hebrew texts.
Textual variants within manuscripts of the original biblical languages
are frequently due to “corruptions ” of the text. Generally speaking, tex-
tual critics have detected two kinds of corruptions which occur in the
transmission of ancient texts and which produce variant readings: (a)
unintentional and (b) intentional. Unintentional errors include those mis-
takes copyists would make either in wrongly hearing a text or in wrongly
reading a text. One way copies could be produced quickly in the ancient
world was for a single person to read the text aloud while a roomful of
scribes wrote copies. As welcome and efficient as this earliest form of
multiple copying might have been, there was always the possibility for
hearing errors to occur. The copyist might not hear the word read cor-
rectly and thus write something else. Or, having heard correctly, the
copyist might not write exactly what was heard. Or, even when a scribe
was copying a manuscript by looking at one document and making a
written copy, visual errors also occurred. The scribe might, for example,
skip a word or a line, write a word or a line twice, misspell a word,
reverse the order of letters within a single word, or reverse the order of

--- Page 19 ---
36 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
words within a sentence. Sometimes notes or glosses made in the mar-
gins of early texts were taken as part of the texts themselves and incorpo-
rated into the text by later copyists. These are only some of the ways
unintentional errors might occur.
Intentional changes in the wording in the text could occur for a variety
of reasons. A scribe might feel compelled to correct the spelling or
grammar of a manuscript being copied, and regardless of whether the
correction was right or wrong, this would introduce yet another variation
into the textual tradition. The scribe might also choose to rearrange the
order of words, sentences, or even paragraphs, and on occasion add
material if there was a felt need to do so. This may have been done to
produce a more coherent or a more logically sequential account. In any
event, such changes, transpositions, and g&es were made by scribes,
even when they were copying sacred texts. Although we may now be
able to determine that their “correction” was wrong, they at least
thought they were improving the text. Scribes also changed texts inten-
tionally for theological or doctrinal reasons. If the text being copied con-
tained a statement with which the scribe disagreed, it was sometimes
changed or expanded to be brought into conformity with a more ortho-
dox position. Ancient Hebrew scribes, for example, noted at least eigh-
teen cases in which they had changed the text for theological reasons. In
some cases, the scribe might choose simply to omit the offensive verse
or passage. Whenever intentional changes were made in the text-and
they were made for other reasons as well-they were made in the hopes
of improving the text or its content.
Ancient biblical writings were copied frequently and became wide-
spread throughout the Mediterranean world. As one might expect, cer-
tain centers, usually major cities such as Alexandria or Rome, became
the “home” of certain biblical texts either because early copies might
have been preserved there or because the names of revered biblical per-
sonalities or scribes came to be associated with such cities. It is not diffi-
cult to imagine how a definite type of textual tradition might originate
and develop within one geographical locale. Scholars have, in fact,
examined the many remaining copies of the biblical writings, especially
the New Testament and the Greek versions of the Old Testament, and
have assigned them to families or recensions, based on their similarities
as well as their attachment to certain geographical locales. Although not
every extant biblical manuscript will fit into these families, they are dis-
tinct enough to provide a convenient way of grouping the manuscrips
which have been preserved, especially in the case of the New Testa-
Textual Criticism 37
ment. They are grouped in families because of their genealogical rela-
tionship. If a particular textual variant was introduced, let us say, in the
fourth century A.D., and this same variant was repeated in an entire
“set” of manuscripts, and if this tendency repeated itself enough times,
this would constitute sufficient evidence to group all the manuscripts
showing similar characteristics into the same family. Moreover, as
scholars have studied the various tendencies within families of manu-
scripts, they have noted certain characteristics. Some manuscript fami-
lies tend to be expansionist because they will consistently contain variant
readings which are longer than those in other groupings. Other manu-
script families, by contrast, may be more conservative in that they
exhibit reluctance to include any changes, either expansions or reduc-
tions in wording. Knowing this becomes valuable to the exegete when
assessing the relative merits of particular variants. For example, if a
variant reading occurs in the text and it is found to be supported only by a
manuscript or a group of manuscripts with an expansionist tendency, it
will more likely be discounted, all other things being equal.
.
As the science of textual criticism has developed over the centuries,
our knowledge of the process by which early manuscripts have been pre-
served and transmitted has increased dramatically. In addition, detailed
knowledge of particular manuscripts, such as their date and place of ori-
gin, peculiarities of style, and how they relate to other manuscripts has
been accumulated. Archaeological discoveries, such as the discovery of
the Qumran or Dead Sea scrolls, have also provided valuable informa-
tion for textual criticism. The results of these scholarly activities con-
tinue to be available in books and periodicals, but they come to fruition
perhaps most visibly in the production of critical editions of the biblical
writings and in the modern translations produced by committees of
scholars using such critical editions.
A critical edition of any ancient writing, including the Old and New
Testaments, contains a text in the original language in which the writing
was produced, along with an extensive set of footnotes, the critical appa-
ratus, which lists textual variants and the different ancient sources in
which the various readings have been preserved, including ancient man-
uscripts, translations, versions, and the works of early commentators
and scholars. Some critical editions provide only a selection of all the
textual variants, while others attempt to include every variation within
the text. Although modern committee translations do not reproduce the
text in the original language, they nevertheless have been produced by
scholars who have given close attention to textual-critical matters. None

--- Page 20 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
of the modem translations contains an extensive critical apparatus. They
rather provide footnotes indicating the most important variations in
wording and give some indication of the nature of the variation. In an
abbreviated fashion, they indicate for the reader the type of variation,
whether addition, omission, alteration, or transposition and indicate in
what textual traditions these occur. The latest critical editions of the
Hebrew and Greek texts, and the latest committee translations of the
Bible, both Old and New Testaments, provide the most up-to-date
accumulation of the results of textual critics working with biblical texts.
These are perhaps the most natural final form into which the work of tex-
tual critics is cast.
As the exegete encounters variants within the text, the primary task
will be to examinett~~s’, assess th,eir.rel&v~ immrt_.nce,  and
decide how they. affec.t_the.passage.  to._heinte~r_eted.  Naturally, the
beginning student will need to rely on the work of experts since textual
criticism itself is a highly developed and complex science. Even so, it is
imI&tant  to-understand what textual criticism seeks to.acl&_ve  and how- ~.. -~ -.- - -.- _  .._~ ^.._  -.
it worJks,_Es_~ntially+.~t.extual criticism hasa threefold&m: (a) to deter-
mine the process by which a text has been transmitted and has come to
exist in variant forms; (b) to establish the original wording, when this is
judged to be possible or feasible; and (c) to determine the best form and
wording of the text that the modem reader should use.
Various criteria for assessing variant readings have been developed by
textual critics. In spite of their complexity, they are often based on com-
mon sense and ingenuity. By familiarizing themselves with what hap-
pens when ancient texts were composed, copied, preserved, and
transmitted, textual critics have detected the kinds of changes that occur.
They have also established the reasons why such changes occur. Conse-
quently, the criteria for judging these changes often consist in “working
back” from the variants toward the more original form of the text. For
example, one of the most fundamental axioms with which textual critics
work is this: “The more difficult reading is to be preferred. ” This rule is
based on the observation that scribes tended to smooth out difficulties
rather than create them. Consequently, given two variations of wording,
the more difficult reading is more likely to have given rise to the simpler
reading rather than vice versa. Another general rule is: “The shorter
reading is to be preferred.” Because copyists tended to be expansionist
rather than reductionist, textual critics will generally give priority to a
shorter rcading rather than a longer one, since they have discovered that
scribes were more likely to have made additions to the text rather than
Textual Criticism 39
deletions. In similar fashion, scribes tended to harmonize divergent
readings rather than create them. For this reason, a variant which looks
“harmonistic” tends to be discounted in favor of one which creates a
dissonance of some sort. In addition to these scribal tendencies, textual
critics also take into account matters of style, vocabulary, and literary
context. For example, if a variant reading tends not to conform to the
author’s vocabulary and style as used elsewhere in the same document or
if it does not easily fit into the larger literary context of the document,
then the likelihood of its being a corruption is increased.
All of the above considerations arise from within the text itself, and
thus are regarded as “internal evidence.” When considerations are
brought to bear from outside the text, these are classified as “external
evidence.” This evidence includes such matters as the date and charac-
ter of the manuscript witnesses, the geographical distribution of the
manuscript witnesses, and the genealogical relationship between the
various families of texts. As noted earlier, textual critics have classified
most of the manuscript witnesses into types or families. They have also
established both dates and geographical locales for the manuscripts. In
some instances, the manuscripts contain this information; in other
instances, it has to be deduced from other considerations, such as the
style of writing, the type of material on which the manuscript was writ-
ten, and so forth. Lists of the relevant manuscripts, with their assigned
dates and locations, are contained in critical editions, and are easily
available in standard works. H7The types of considerations at work here often involve chronology. If
a variant reading occurs, one of the first questions to be asked is: When
did it enter the manuscript tradition? Was it original or not? If not, was it
an early or late change? Generally speaking, the earlier a reading, the
more likely it is to be authentic. Yet, because of what we know about the
transmission of manuscripts, this is not invariably the case. For exam-
ple, a corrupt reading might be attested in a fourth-century manuscript,
while an eighth-century manuscript might preserve a better tradition and
the original reading. In this case, obviously, the later reading is to be
preferred. Similarly, if a corrupt reading is attested in several extant
manuscripts, whereas a clearly authentic reading is attested in only one
extant manuscript, the latter would be preferred, even though supported
by only one manuscript witness. Hence, another general rule developed
by textual critics is that manuscript witnesses are to be weighed rather
than counted.
It can now be seen that in deciding between readings no single crite-

--- Page 21 ---
40 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
r-ion will work in every case, for some offset others. Instead, the textual
critic begins with a particular instance, accumulates all the evidence pos-
sible, both internal and external, then examines and assesses the prob-
lem on its individual merits. All of the criteria are brought to bear on the
problem, but in the end it is the textual critic’s own informed judgment,
and in many instances creative insight, which tilts the balance one way
or another.
As the beginning student becomes more familiar with the study of
texts, what these criteria are and how they are applied will become
clearer. Such understanding will allow the student to make more sense
of the critical apparatus in modem critical editions as well as modem
translations.
At this point, however, it is in order to suggest a procedure which the
beginning student can follow in addressing textual-critical problems
which arise in a biblical passage. First, the text and the footnotes in a
modem committee translation, or preferably several translations, should
be consulted. These are usually located at the bottom of the page and
generally only note the most important textual problems. In annotated
translations, they are directly above the explanatory notes, which usu-
ally deal with other matters. Second, 
one_shoulddetermine  the type of
probleminvolved. Any abbreviations or symbols used in the textual-crit-
ical notes will be explained in the preface of the edition being used, and
by consulting these, the student will be able to determine more precisely
the nature of the problem. Third, having done so, the student should
consult a critical commentary on the passage. A critical commentary, as
opposed to a more general, expository commentary, will mention all the
important textual-critical problems and discuss them. Even though criti-
cal commentaries will employ Hebrew and Greek terms, the student who
possesses knowledge of neither original language will be able to deter-
mine the gist of the problem. If the translators of a particular edition
have produced a handbook explaining their choice of various readings,
these should also be consulted. On the basis of these, and perhaps after
having consulted more than one commentary, the student should take a
fourth step. This will require listing the variants and, beside each vari-
ant, a listing of the supporting witnesses. Once this is done, one will
need to apply the external criteria, that is, determine how early the wit-
nesses are which attest the various readings, and how much stock one
should place in them. One may then begin to apply the internal criteria,
asking whether a particular reading conforms to the general expectations
of the document based on what is known about it internally. For exam-
Textual Criticism
ple, is it consistent with the style, vocabulary,context, and theology of
the- of the document? Or, is a reading simpler or more difficult,
shorter or longer? Quite often, valuable discussions of important
passages are.conta~~din booksdevoted to texual criticism, and the stu-
dent should check the index of biblical references in some of the stan-
dard volumes to find these.
Obviously, the ability to pursue textual-critical questions is increased
if one possesses a knowledge of the original languages. In this case, one
should first consult one of the standard critical editions of the Bible. One
can then lay out the alternative readings and see the nature of the prob-
lem, and then proceed to collect and assess the evidence. For external
criteria, lists of the manuscripts and their characteristics are readily
available, and these should be consulted as one itemizes the manuscript
witnesses supporting each variant. In close conjunction with this, the
critical commentaries should be consulted, and from them a more
informed understanding of the problem can be reached and decisions can
be made about the variant readings.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Critical Editions of the Old Testament
Brooke, A. E. et al. (eds.), The Old Testament in Greek (3 ~01s.;  London: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1906-1940). Incomplete.
Elliger, K. and W. Rudolph (eds.), Biblia hebruicu stuttgartensia (Stuttgart:
Deutsche Bibelstiftung, 1977).
Kittel, R. (ed.), Bibliu hebruicu (9th ed.; Stuttgart: Wtirttembergische Bibelan-
stalt, 1954).
Rahlfs, A. (ed.), Septuugintu (8th ed.; 2 ~01s.; Stuttgart: Wtirttembergische
Bibelanstalt, 1965).
Septuugintu: Vetus  Testumentum gruece uuctoritute Societutis Giittingensis
editum (GGttingen:  Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1931-).
Critical Editions of the New Testament
Aland, K. et al. (eds.), The Greek New Testament (3d ed.; New York/London:
United Bible Societies, 1975).
Aland, K. (ed.), Synopsis quuttuor evungeliorum: Locispurullelis evungeliorum
upocryphorum etputrum udhibitis (9th ed.; Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelstiftung,
1976).
Aland K. (ed), Synopsis of the Four Gospels: Greek-English Edition of the
Synopsis Quuttuor Evungeliorum with the Text of the Revised Standard Ver-
sion (3d ed.; New York/London: United Bible Societies, 1979).
Funk, R. W., New Gospel Purullels  (2 ~01s.; Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
19851987).
Greeven, H. (ed.), Synopse der drei ersten Evangelien: mit Beigube der johannei-

--- Page 22 ---
42 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
schen Parallelstellen = Synopsis of the First Three Gospels with the Addition of
the Johannine  Parallels (Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], 1981).
Huck, A. (ed.), Synopsis of the First Three Gospels (9th ed., rev. by H.
Lietzmann; Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], 1950; English ed. by F.
L. Cross; Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1957).
Kilpatrick, G. D. (ed.), Hg kain2 diatheke  (2d ed.; London: British and Foreign
Bible Society, 1958).
Nestle, E. and K. Aland (eds.), Novum Testamenturn Graece  (26th ed.; Stutt-
gart: Deutsche Bibelstiftung, 1979).
Throckmorton, B. H., Jr., Gospel Parallels: A Synopsis ofthe First Three Gos-
pels (4th ed. ; New York/London: Thomas Nelson, 1979).
Old Testament Textual Criticism
*Ap-Thomas, D. R., A Primer of Old Testament Text Criticism (2d ed.; Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1965).
Cross, F. M. and S. Talmon (eds.), Qumran and the History ofthe Biblical Text
(Cambridge/London: Harvard University Press, 1975).
Jellicoe, S., The Septuagint and Modern Study (London/New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1968; reprinted, Ann Arbor: Eisenbrauns, 1978).
Jellicoe, S. (ed.), Studies in the Septuagint: Origins, Recensions, and Interpre-
tations: Selected with a Prolegomenon (New York: KTAV, 1974).
Klein, R. W., Textual Criticism of the Old Testament: The Septuagint After
Qumran (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1974).
Leiman, S. Z. (ed.), The Canon and Masorah of the Hebrew Bible (New York:
KTAV, 1974).
*McCarter, P. K., Jr., Textual Criticism: Recovering the Text of the Hebrew
Bible (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1986).
Roberts, B. J., The Old Testament Text and Versions: The Hebrew Text in
Transmission and the History of the Ancient Versions (Cardiff: University of
Wales Press, 1951).
Roberts, B. J., “The Textual Transmission of the Old Testament” in Tradition
and Interpretation (ed. by G. W. Anderson; London/New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1979) l-30.
Tov, E., The Text-Critical Use of the Septuagint in Biblical Research (Jerusa-
lem: Simor Ltd., 1981).
*Weingreen, J., Introduction to the Critical Study of the Text of the Hebrew
Bible (London/New York: Oxford University Press, 1982).
Wonneberger, R., Understanding BHS: A Manualfor the Users of Biblia hebra-
ica stuttgartensia (Rome: Pontifical Institute Press, 1984).
Wiirthwein, E., The Text of the Old Testament: An Introduction to the Biblia
Hebraica  (rev. ed.; Grand Rapids/London: Eerdmans Publishing Company/
SCM Press, 1979).
New Testament Textual Criticism
*Aland, K. and B. Aland, The Text of the New Testament (Leiden/Grand
Rapids: E. J. Brill/Eerdmans  Publishing Company, 1987).
Birdsall, J. N., “The New Testament Text” in Cambridge History of the Bible,
1. 308-77.
Textual Criticism 43
Colwell, E. C., What is the Best New Testament? (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1952).
Colwell, E. C., Studies in Methodology in Textual Criticism of the New Testa-
ment (Leiden/Grand  Rapids: E. J. BrillEerdmans Publishing Company,
1969).
Epp, E. J., “The Eclectic Method in New Testament Textual Criticism: Solution,
or Symptom?” in Harvard Theological Review 69 (1976) 21 l-57.
Epp, E. J. and G. D. Fee (eds.), New Testament Textual Criticism: Its Signif?-
cancefor  Exegesis (London/New York: Oxford University Press, 1981).
*Fee, G. D., “The Textual Criticism of New Testament ” in Biblical Criticism:
Historical, Literary, and Textual (ed. by R. K. Harrison et al.; Grand Rapids:
Zondervan Publishing House, 1978) 127-55.
Finegan, J., Encountering New Testament Manuscripts: A Working Introduction
to Textual Criticism (Grand Rapids/London: Eerdmans Publishing Company/
SPCK, 1974/1975).
Greenlee, J. H., Introduction to New Testament Textual Criticism (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1964).
Hatch, W. H. P., Facsimiles and Descriptions of Minuscule Manuscripts of the
New Testament (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1951).
Hatch, W. H. P., The Principal Uncial Manuscripts of the New Testament (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1939).
Kenyon, F. G., The Text of the Greek Bible (3rd ed., rev.; London: Gerald
Duckworth and Co., 1982).
Metzger, B. M., The Early Versions of the New Testament: Their Origin, Trans-
mission, andLimitations (London/New York: Oxford University Press, 1977).
*Metzger, B. M., The Text of the New Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption,
and Restoration (2d ed.; New York/London: Oxford University Press, 1968).
Metzger, B. M., A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament (London/
New York: United Bible Societies, 1971).
Moulton, H. K., Papyrus, Parchment and Print: The Story of How the New Tes-
tament Text Has Reached Us (London: Lutterworth Press, 1967).
. Roberts, C. H., “Books in the Graeco-Roman World and in the New Testa-
ment” in Cambridge History of the Bible, 1. 48-66.
Tasker, R. V. G. (ed.), The Greek New Testament: Being the Text Translated in
the New English Bible, 1961 (London/New York: Oxford University Press/
Cambridge University Press, 1964).
Taylor, V., The Text of the New Testament: A Short Introduction (London/New
York: Macmillan and Co. Ltd./St. Martin’s Press, 1961).
Translation and History of the Bible
Arbez, E., “Modem Translations of the Old Testament: V. English Language
Translations” in Catholic Biblical Quarterly 17 (1955) 456-85.
*Bailey, L. R. (ed.), The Word of God: A Guide to English Versions of the Bible
(Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1982).
Brenton, L. C. L. (ed.), The Septuagint with Apocrypha:  Greek and English
(London: Samuel Bagster & Sons, 185 1; reprinted, Grand Rapids: Zondervan
Publishing House, 1970).
Brockington, L. H. (ed.), The Hebrew Text of the Old Testament: The Readings

--- Page 23 ---
I
,-
44 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook CHAPTER 3
Adopted by the Translators of the New English Bible (London/New York:
Oxford University Press/Cambridge University Press, 1973).
Bruce, F. F., The Books and the Parchments: Some Chapters on the Transmis-
sion of the Bible (3d ed.; London: Pickering and Inglis, 1963).
*Bruce, F. F., History of the Bible in English: From the Earliest Versions (3d
ed.; New York/London: Oxford University PresslLutterworth  Press, 1978).
Huberman, B., “Translating the Bible ” in Atlantic Monthly 253 (1985) 43-58.
Kenyon, F., Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts (5th ed., rev. by A. W.
Adams; London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1958).
*Kubo, S. and W. Specht, So Many Versions? Twentieth Century English Ver-
sions of the Bible (rev. ed.; Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House,
1983).
Lewis, J. P., The English Bible: From KJV to NIV (Grand Rapids: Baker Book
House, 1981).
Nineham,  D. E. (ed.), The New English Bible Reviewed (London: Epworth
Press, 1965).
Orlinsky, H. M., Notes on the New Translation of the Torah (Philadelphia: Jew-
ish Publication Society of America, 1969).
Pope, H., English Versions of the Bible (rev. ed.; St. Louis/London: B. Herder,
1952).
Preliminary and Interim Report on the Hebrew Old Testament Text Project (5
~01s.; ed. by the UBS committee; New York/London: United Bible Societies,
1973-1980).
Robinson, H. W., The Bible in Its Ancient and English Versions (London/New
York: Oxford University Press, 1954).
Textual Notes on the New American Bible (Washington: Catholic Biblical Asso-
ciation of America, n.d.).
Weigle, L. A., The New Testament Octapla: Eight English Versions of the New
Testament in the Tyndale-King James Tradition (New York/London: Thomas
Nelson, 1962).
HISTORICAL
CRITICISM:The Setting in Time and Space
Historical criticism of documents is based on the assumption that a
text is historical in at least two senses: it may relate history as well as
have its own history. For this reason, we can distinguish between the
“history in the text” and the “history ofthe text.” The former expres-
sion refers to what the text itself narrates or relates about history,
whether persons, events, social conditions, or even ideas. In this sense,
a text may serve as a window through which we can peer into a historical
period. From a critical reading of what the text says we can draw conclu-
sions about political, social, or religious conditions of the period or peri-
ods during which the text was produced. The latter expression refers to
something different, for it is not concerned with what the text itself says
or describes-the story it tells- but with the story of the text, or what
one writer calls the “career of the text”-its own history: how, why,
when, where, and in what circumstances it originated; by whom and for
whom it was written, composed, edited, produced, and preserved; why
it was produced and the various influences that affected its origin, for-
mation, development, preservation, and transmission.
If one does a historical-critical analysis of The Histories of Herodotus
(fifth century B.C.), for example, both of these aspects come into play.
In investigating the historical and cultural descriptions in the work itself,
the critic asks such questions as: Whose history is being described?
What events are seen as important? Who and what are talked about in the
text? What information and perspectives gained from sources outside
Herodotus’ work can be brought to bear on his work to aid in under-
standing? Are there special emphases of the author which dominate and
color the presentation? How reliably does Herodotus describe matters
and events? In addition to what Herodotus relates in The Histories--the
history in the text-the critic also investigates the situation of the author

--- Page 24 ---
46 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
himself and the context in which the history was written-the history of
the text. Here the following types of questions are addressed: What is
known biographically about the author and the place of this work in his
life’s activity? What cultural factors of the day may explain the produc-
tion of the work? What tendencies and interests of the writer and his time
influenced the work, its shape, and its contents? What objectives and
goals did Herodotus have in mind for his work?
Historical criticism of the biblical writings is based on assumptions
similar to those used in working with other ancient texts. The biblical
critic is concerned with both the situation depicted in the text and the
situation which gave birth to the text. The first of these is obviously of
more relevance when the biblical books are concerned directly with his-
torical matters, such as Genesis through 2 Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles,
Ezra, Nehemiah, the Gospels, and Acts. Even in nonhistorical books,
such as Proverbs and Psalms, the cultural situations and conditions
reflected in the texts are of concern to the interpreter. For all the biblical
materials, the historical and cultural conditions out of which they came
is of interest to the interpreter and an aid to understanding. This is the
case even though interpreters frequently know nothing about the actual
authors or collectors of various books.
These two aspects of historical criticism were applied in a limited
fashion to biblical writings by ancient Jewish and Christian interpreters
as well as by others. Jewish interpreters tried to assign the various Old
Testament books to particular authors and even debated such issues as
whether Moses could have written the account of his own death found in
Deuteronomy 34. Tradition sought, for example, to depict the life situa-
tion within which David supposedly wrote many of the Psalms, and this
appears even in the biblical text itself (see Psalms 3; 7; 18; 34; 51; 52;
54; 56; 57; 59; 60; 63; and 142). Such matters as chronological problems
and discrepancies in the text were also recognized. The Christian, Julius
Africanus (d. 245),  produced a world history and major encyclopedia
and analyzed some biblical texts with regard to their historical reliabil-
ity. Jerome (d. 420) reports that he once received a letter from a lady
inquiring about the discrepancies in the Gospel accounts of Jesus’ resur-
rection and appearances. Two pagan writers, Celsus (second century
A.D.) and Porphyry (d. 303), wrote volumes in which they addressed
both of these historical dimensions. They not only challenged the reli-
ability of what was reported in some texts on the basis of internal evi-
dence but also challenged what was taught about some texts, for
example, the traditional authorship of some books.
Historical Criticism 47
Ancient interpreters, however, sought to defend both what was writ-
ten in and what was reported about the text by attempting to resolve
problems within the text and by defending traditional views about
authorship. One way in which they did this was to attempt, at all costs,
to harmonize discrepancies in the text. A rabbinic axiom held that in
Scripture “there is no before nor after,” that is, chronological problems
must be ignored or overcome.
Little did ancient Jewish and Christian interpreters recognize that dis-
crepancies in the text might be the result of two different texts having
been woven or edited together, each reflecting a different viewpoint or
stemming from a different historical setting. Nor was there a clear recog-
nition that two conflicting texts, perhaps from different books, might
stem from different historical periods, with one reflecting an earlier, the
other a later outlook. We might say that ancient interpreters overlooked,
minimized, or ignored the history ofthe text and tended to read the Bible
“on the flat.” Exegesis based on such a view of the text failed to appre-
ciate that the Bible is an anthology of writings, deriving from different
historical contexts and cultural situations, produced and collected over
centuries.
Since the development of modern historical consciousness and the
resulting methodologies which this has produced, the h
of the biblical materials have received greater attention
can really no longer be respectfully ignored. Instead we must ask: How
does the exegete utilize and benefit from historical criticism? What are
the tools that can be used to facilitate this endeavor?
We shall deal first with matters pertaining to the history in the text, or
the situation the text describes. Quite obviously, if the text contains ref-
erences to persons, places, and customs strange to the reader, it will be
necessary to become acquainted sufficiently with the historical period or
cultural setting described iathetext to understand what is being said at
the most elementary level. Tw@st useful for obtaining this type
of information will normally be the standard Bible dictionaries and ency-
clopedias. Equally useful, however, will be histories, sociological
descriptions, and handbooks of the period being described. Histories of
Israel and of early Christianity are the most useful sources to consult on
matters of history, chronology, names, and events. In addition to these,
individual books on the culture, sociological context, and social life of
biblical times may provide well-organized information on different fac-
ets of daily life presupposed or referred to by the text. This type of infor-
mation is quite often included in Bible atlases and geographies, but

--- Page 25 ---
48 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
obviously these will be most valuable in locating place names and other
geographical information pertinent to understanding the text.
Another source that can often illuminate the situation depicted in the
text itself is comparative non-biblical literature. Other writings of antiq-
uity may reflect a similar outlook, derive from roughly the same period,
discuss the same topic, or provide valuable background information.
The importance of these parallel references has been recognized for cen-
turies, but they have received even greater prominence since the begin-
ning of the twentieth century, often by scholars interested in studying the
history of ancient religious traditions other than Judaism and early Chris-
tianity. This “history-of-religions” approach uncovered and collected
vast amounts of materials from the ancient world which have shed light
and provided new insights on the biblical writings. For example, by
reading the creation stories of Genesis 1-3 alongside other creation sto-
ries from the ancient Near Eastern world, we can note both similarities
and differences and understand the biblical texts even better. Similarly,
archaeological discoveries have unearthed hundreds of letters and other
ordinary documents from daily life especially from the Hellenistic-
Roman period. Comparison of these with New Testament letters has
greatly contributed to our understanding of both the form and content of
the latter. Historical scholarship in the last two centuries has profoundly
affected every aspect of our biblical understanding. Not only has our
understanding of particular passages been increased, but also our knowl-
edge of the history and language of the biblical text itself. This has led to
an increased awareness that the biblical writings reflect the historical sit-
uation out of which they arose. Recognizing this historical dimension of
biblical writings is now regarded as an essential feature of any informed
exegesis of a biblical text. For this reason, most biblical commentaries,
especially those produced within the past century, provide numerous ref-
erences to such parallel texts and normally incorporate insights gained
from studying such documents into the interpretation provided of the
text itself.
In order to locate such parallel texts, the student should consult two
kinds of sources: (a) _c_ritica!  comme@aries,  which usually provide refer-
ences in footnotes and (b) anthologies of writings from the ancient
world, usually arranged by literary genre, such as “creation stories,”
“legal texts,” “historical documents,” “birth stories,” “letters,”
“apocalypses, ” and so forth.
The second historical dimension the exegete should explore is the his-
tory @he text, or the situation out of which the text arose--the situation
Historical Criticism 49
of the author and the audience. It is now well-known that many of the
biblical books are anonymous, even though later tradition assigned
authors to them. None of the four Gospels, for example, contains an
explicit reference to who wrote them, even though in the second and
thi.$ centuries they were assigned to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.
In’fact, it is now widely recognized that many of the writings of the Bible
were edited rather than written by single individuals and that many per-
sons and groups engaged in this editing process which, in some
instances, extended over a period of decades or even centuries. Espe-
cially is this the case with the Pentateuch, but also with other parts of the
Bible as well. This has required a shift in the way in which @@preters
u@erstandth~er@~tionship,betw~e~~he  biblical writings and the original
--~-&fi._&& writ’___._..._?n_gs.  In very few instances does it
appear that a single author penned a writing, from start to finish, in one
sitting. Even in those cases where this appears to have happened, there is
strong evidence suggesting that these writings frequently continued to be
ed’
/
ed, either by the author, or by the author’s successors.
In some instances, the situation described in the text and the situation
. .’ out of which the text arose may reflect the same historjcal setting. On the-... . .._
other hand, thessv._may represent different l&torical  set-
tings, .separated___~y_longperiods  of time. The situation described in
Paul’s letters to the Corinthians is contemporary with Paul’s own situa-
tion. Handbooks describing the mid-fifties of the first century A.D. will
be useful in illuminating both. The Pentateuch, on the other hand, was
obviously written much later than the events which it purports to
describe. Similarily, the Gospels were written considerably later than
the events they describe. In such cases, the exegete should seek to deter-
mine as much as possible about the situation out of which the passage or
its source arose, as well as the historical situation it describes.
One of the best illustrations of this point occurs in the Old Testament
book of Daniel, where the events depicted in the text extend from the
si?c.tl?_t___t_he”s~~~~~_~e~t~~.  but.the time of the book’s final cqmposition
has been established as the mid-second century B.C. To understand a
passage from the book of Daniel, therefore, will require the interpreter
to become familiar both with the sixth century, the period it describes,
and the second century, the period in which it was written. Similarly, in
interpreting the Gospels, it may be impsrtant to know about historical. _  .
develoJ_m_ents,in  Judaism a6a?hristianity  within the last quarte;.of^the
first century A.D., the time of their probable coml&ition; as it is the first
thirty years of the first century, the time of Jesus’ ministry. For example,

--- Page 26 ---
50 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
to understand Jesus’ polemic against the Pharisees in Matthew 23, it is as
important to know the history of Jewish-Christian relations after A.D. 70
as it is to know the history of Pharisaism in the time of Jesus.
Obviously, an important part of the history ofthe text is the author of
the text, and this introduces two&uther  considerations: (a) the issue of
multiple authorship of a text and (b) the problem of pseudonymous
authorship of a text. These may be considered in turn.
Although we often find a passage within a biblical book under the title
of a single author, such as Isaiah, Solomon, Matthew, or Paul, we can-
not assume necessarily in an exegesis of the passage t at it contains the
words of such an individual in an unqualified sense
i
e may in fact dis-
cover that it is impossible to determine who actua wrote the text or
who actually is responsible for the final form of the text, and that the
interpretation of the passage will have to be modified accordinglyil&
we>oied.zjier, exegesis often requires the interpreter to be far more
modest m what can be asserted about the text than the pre-understanding
assumed at the outset. The standard handbooks on the Old Testament
provide detailed descriptions of the most well-known instance of this,
namely, the multiple authorship of the Pentateuch and the various histor-
ical contexts in which its different parts arose. We noted earlier the com-
mon practice in antiquity of collecting writings under the name of a
revered individual of the past or of assigning writings to such an individ-
ual. Apocalyptic writing, such as the book of Daniel mentioned above,
provides numerous instances of this, but it also occurs elsewhere in the
biblical writings. The canonical book of Isaiah, though constituting a
single book within the Old Testament, is now widely recognized as the
work of at least two separate “authors,” one addressing an eighth-cen-
tury B.C. situation, the other a sixth century B.C. situation. In the New
Testament, thirteen writings are attributed to the Apostle Paul and yet
his authorship of six of these is widely disputed. They may have been
compiled and collected into their final form after Paul’s death, although
still attributed to him.
Such questions of authorship and context are dealt with extensively in
introductions to the Old and New Testaments, as well as in the introduc-
tory sections of commentaries on biblical books. On any particular pas-
sage, the student may check either of these sources for help in
determining whether the passage is assumed to be the result of pseudon-
ymous or multiple authorship and whether it reflects a period of time
much later than that described in the passage itself.
Yet another aspect of this “external history” involves the literary
Historical Criticism 51
composition of the t&&elf. This will be treated much more fully in a
r chapter on literary criticism but it deserves to be mentioned here
because it too is part of the history ofthe text. Because the final form of
the biblical text has often been the result of extensive editing, a single
book may contain units whose relationship to each other is not altogether
clear. 
S~~_been&sert.ed~ or interpolated, into the,*
~anrltheintemreter,.~Fljj!,A~ed,to determine, if possible, why this
“wasdoneandhow.  For example, many of the prophetic books of the Old
Testament are not uniform literary compositions, but contain sections
consisting of narratives and oracles whose relationship to each other may
be unclear. Some of the Pauline letters are actually composite docu-
ments where smaller letters or fragments of letters have been combined
into a single document. In such cases, the interpreter cannot assume that
the same historical setting gave rise to all the documents but instead must
be open to a variety of possibilities.
A third aspect of the external history of a passage may be mentioned.
This has to do with the way in which certain parts of the Bible have
incorporated older biblical traditions and reinterpreted them by present-
ing them in a new, modified form. The Old Testament books of Chroni-
cles are best understood as re-presentations of the books of Kings but
written from a different standpoint. Similarly, in the book of Daniel we
find that older biblical traditions have been appropriated and reinter-
preted. In chapter 9, the interpretation of the seventy years of desolation
draws on Jeremiah (25: 11-12; 29: 10) which itself is based on an ancient
Near Eastern formulaic tradition. In the New Testament, Matthew and
Luke are probably directly dependent on Mark, yet they have expanded
Mark’s story considerably and altered it in many respects.
‘. This reminds the interpreter that much of the biblical material is
genetically relatedinthe s.ensethat.earliermaterials  are-taken up, incor-
porated, and re-presented in later materials. Viewed this way, the bibli-
cal materials themselves are seen to have undergone historical
development, and this forms a valuable perspective for the interpreter.
For example, if we are interpreting a passage in Matthew, we should be
aware that it stands further along the historical continuum than Mark and
that even if the same event is being reported in both Gospels, the “situa-
tion of the author” might be radically different in each case, different
enough, perhaps, to provide a different understanding of both texts.
This becomes especially important as we attempt to interpret both the
Old and New Testaments together, for the latter presupposes the former,
and in many cases cites it directly. In trying to understand a New Testa-

--- Page 27 ---
52 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
ment passage in which the Old Testament is cited or referred to, we may
greatly benefit by realizing that this Old Testament passage has been
interpreted and reinterpreted many times between the period of its origi-
nal composition and its incorporation into the New Testament text. A
New Testament text must frequently be understood in light of the history
of interpretation of an Old Testament text.
This may be stated another way. The authors of the biblical writings
were not only composing new texts, but also often transmitting and
interpreting older texts and traditions as well. Seen this way, much of the
Bible may be said to have originated as a series of interpretations in
which authors took older traditions and reinterpreted them in light of
their own situation. Nor did this chain of interpretation cease when the
biblical writings ceased to be written or even when the biblical docu-
ments were collected into their final canonical form. Long after the Old
and New Testament writings were recognized as canonical, Jewish and
Christian authors continued to quote and interpret them, and their inter-
pretations can be extremely illuminating to the contemporary interpreter
as well. By paying attention to this “historical foreground,” as well as
to the “historical background” of the biblical documents, we can often
see a passage of Scripture in a new light and develop new levels of
understanding which would otherwise be missed by trying to make the
theoretical jump from the twentieth century to the first century or earlier.
To cite a specific example, we may refer to the well-known reference
to a “virgin’s” conceiving a child, first mentioned in Isaiah 7:14 and
later quoted in both Matthew and Luke. If the student is interpreting
Matthew 1:21, it must be recognized that the passage may not mean the
same in the context of Isaiah as in the context of Matthew since the pas-
sage itself has its own history of interpretation. It will be necessary to
examine the passage in its Isaiah setting, trace the ways it was used and
interpreted in the centuries prior to the Christian era, and also to examine
the different ways it is interpreted in the New Testament writings. Hav-
ing done so, it will then be useful to see how later Christian writers
understood the same passage. W~~can_hus,.ea~ily see that .because the-
“historical care.er” of a text may be long and continuous, it may provide
us a useful perspective by which we can develop our awn interpretation
of the passage.
Historical Criticism 53
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dictionaries and Encyclopedias
*Achtemeier, P. J. (ed.), Harper’s Bible Dictionary (San Francisco/London:
Harper & Row, 1985).
Brorniley, G. W. (ed.), International Standard Bible Encyclopedia (rev. ed.; 4
~01s.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1979-).
*Buttrick, G. A. (ed.), Interpreter’sDictionary  ofthe  Bible (4 ~01s.; Nashville:
Abingdon Press, 1962; Supplementary Volume, ed. by K. Crim, 1976).
Douglas, J. D. et al. (eds.), The New Bible Dictionary (Leicester/Grand Rapids:
Inter-Varsity Press/Eerdmans  Publishing Company, 1962).
Encyclopuediu Judaica (16 ~01s.: Jerusalem/New York: Keter Publishing House
Ltd./Macmillan, 1971).
Gehman, H. S. (ed.), The New Westminster Dictionary of the Bible (Philadel-
phia: Westminster Press, 1970).
Hastings, J. (ed.), Dictionary of the Bible (rev. ed. by F. C. Grant and H. H.
Rowley; Edinburgh/New York: T. & T. Clark/Charles Scribners Sons,
1963).
McKenzie, J. L., Dictionary ofthe Bible (Milwaukee/London: Bruce Publishing
Company/Geoffrey Chapman, 1966).
Histories of Israel and Judah
Bright, J., A History of Israel (3d ed.; Philadelphia/London: Westminster Press/
SCM Press, 1981).
Castel, F., The History of Israel and Judah in Old Testument Times (Mahwah,
NJ: Paulist Press, 1983).
Hayes, J. H. and J. M. Miller (eds.), Israelite and Judueun History (Philadel-
phia/London: Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1977).
Herrmann, S., A History of Israel in Old Testament Times (2d ed.; London/Phil-
adelphia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1981).
Jagersma, H., A History of Israel in the Old Testament Period (London/Phila-
delphia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1982).
*Miller, J. M. and J. H. Hayes, A History of Ancient Israel and Judah (Philadel-
phia/London: Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1986).
Noth, M., The History of Israel (2d ed.; London/New York: A. & C. Black/
Harper & Row, 1960).
Soggin, J. A., A History of Israel: From the Beginnings to the Bar Kochbu
Revolt, AD 135 (London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1984/
1985).
de Vaux, R., The Early History of Israel (London/Philadelphia: Darton,  Long-
man, and Todd/Westminster Press, 1978).
World History of the Jewish People: Ancient Times (Tel Aviv/Jerusalem: Mas-
sada Publishing Co., 1964-).
History and Literature of Intertestamental Judaism
*Cohen, S. J. D., From the Maccabees to the Mishnuh (Philadelphia/London:
Westminster Press/SPCK,  1987).

--- Page 28 ---
54 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Collins, J. J., Between Athens and Jerusalem: Jewish Identity in the Hellenistic
Diaspora (New York: Crossroad, 1982).
Hengel, M., Judaism and Hellenism: Studies in Their Encounter in Palestine
During the Early Hellenistic Period (2 ~01s.;  London/Philadelphia: SCM
Press/Fortress Press, 1974).
Mulder, M. J. et al. (eds.), The Literature of the Jewish People in the Period of
the Second Temple and Talmud (3 ~01s.; AssenlPhiladelphia:  Van Gorcum/
Fortress Press, 198~).
*Nickelsburg,  G. W. E., Jewish Literature Between the Bible and the Mishnah:
A Historical and Literary Introduction (Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/
SCM Press, 1981).
*Scht.irer, E., The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ (175
BC-AD 135): A New English Version Revised and Edited (ed. by G. Vermes
and F. Millar et al.; 3 ~01s.;  Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1973-).
Histories of Early Christianity
Bruce, F. F., New Testament History (London/Garden City: Oliphants/Double-
day &Company, 1969/1972).
*Conzelmann,  H., History of Primitive Christianity (Nashville: Abingdon
Press, 1973).
Filson, F. V., A New Testament History: The Story of the Emerging Church
(London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1964).
Goppelt, L., Apostolic and Post-Apostolic Times (London: A. & C. Black,
1970; reprinted, Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1977).
*Leaney, A. R. C., The Jewish and Christian World 200 BC to AD 200 (Cam-
bridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Lietzmann, H., A History of the Early Church (4 ~01s.; London: Lutterworth
Press, 1937-1951; reprinted in 2 ~01s.; Cleveland/New York: World Publish-
ing Co., 1961).
Pfeiffer, R. H., History of New Testament Times with an Introduction to the
Apocrypha  (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1949).
Reicke, B., The New Testament Era: The World of the Bihlc,from  500 BC to AD
100 (Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/A. & C. Black, 196Xi1969).
Weiss, J., Earliest Christianity: A History of the Period AD 30-150 (2 ~01s.;
New York: Wilson-Erickson 1937; reissued, Gloucester: Pctcr Smith, 1970).
Atlases and Geographies
Aharoni, Y., The Land of the Bible: A Historical Geography (rev. ed. by A. F.
Rainey; Philadelphia/London: Westminster Press/Burns & Gates, 197911980).
*Aharoni, Y. and M. Avi-Yonah, The Macmilltrn  Bible Atltrs (rev. cd.; New
York/London: Macmillan Publishing Company/Collier Macrnillun Company,
1977).
Avi-Yonah, M., The Holy Lantifrom ihe Prrsirrn to the Arab Contlia~sts (53h UC
to AD 640): A Historical Grwgruphy  (rev. cd.; Grand Rapid.\: b:tker Book
House, 1977).
Baly, D., Geopruphicctl  Compru~ion  to the Bible (New YorkiLondon: McGraw-
Hill/Lutterworth Press, 1963).
Historical Criticism 55
Baly, D., The Geography of the Bible (2d ed.; New York/London: Harper &
Row/Lutterworth Press, 1979).
Grollenberg, L. H., Atlas of the Bible (London/New York: Thomas Nelson,
1956).
Grollenberg, L. H., The Penguin Shorter Atlas of the Bible (Harmondsworth/
Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1978).
*May, H. G., Oxford Bible Atlas (3d ed.; rev. by J. Day; New York/London:
Oxford University Press, 1984).
Rogerson, J., Atlas of the Bible (London/New York: Facts on File, 1984).
*Smith, G. A., Historical Geography of the Holy Land (4th ed.; London: Hod-
der and Stoughton, 1896; reprinted by various publishers).
Wright, G. E. and F. V. Filson, The Westminster Historical Atlas to the Bible
(rev. ed.; Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1956).
Archaeology
Aharoni, Y., The Archaeology of the Land of Israel (Philadelphia/London:
Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1982).
Albright, W. F., The Archaeology of Palestine (new ed., rev. by W. G. Dever;
Gloucester: Peter Smith, 1976).
*Avi-Yonah, M. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Archaeological Excavations in the Holy
Land (4 ~01s. ; LondonIEnglewood  Cliffs: Oxford University Press/Prentice-
Hall, 1976-1979).
Blaiklock, E. M. and R. K. Harrison (eds.), The New International Dictionary
of Biblical Archaeology (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House,
1984).
Finegan, J., Archaeological History of the Ancient Middle East (Boulder/Folke-
stone: Westview Press/Dawson & Sons Ltd., 1979).
Finegan, J., The Archaeology of the New Testament: The Life of Jesus and the
Beginning of the Early Church (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1969).
Finegan, J., The Archaeology of the New Testament: The Mediterranean World
of the Early Christian Apostles (Boulder/Beckenham/Croom Helm: Westview
Press, 1981).
Kenyon, K. M., Archaeology in the Holy Land (4th ed.; London/New York:
Ernest Benn Limited/W. W. Norton and Company, 1974).
Kenyon, K. M., The Bible and Recent Archaeology (London/Atlanta: British
Museum/John Knox Press, 1978).
Lance, H. D., The Old Testament and the Archaeologist (Philadelphia/London:
Fortress Press/SPCK, 1981).
Schoville, K. N., Biblical Archaeology in Focus (Grand Rapids: Baker Book
House, 1978).
Thomas, D. N., Archaeology and Old Testament Study (London/New York:
Oxford University Press, 1967).
Thompson, J. A., The Bible and Archaeology (2d ed.; Grand Rapids/Exeter:
Eerdmans Publishing Company/Paternoster Press, 197211973).
Wright, G. E., Biblical Archaeology (rev. ed.: Philadelphia/London: West-
minster Press/Gerald Duckworth & Co., Ltd.; 1962).

--- Page 29 ---
56 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Biblical Backgrounds: Culture and Daily Life
Aune, D. E., The New Testament in Its Literary Environment (Philadelphia/
London: Westminster Press/SPCK,  1987).
Bickerman, E. J., Chronology of the Ancient World (London/Ithaca: Thames
and Hudson/Cornell University Press, 1968).
Bouquet, A. C., Everyday Life in New Testament Times (London/New York: B.
T. Batsford/Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1953).
Cat-y, M. and T. J. Haarhoff, Life and Thought in the Greek and Roman World
(London/New York: Methuen/Bames and Noble, 1940).
Finegan, J., Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in
the Ancient World and Problems of Chronology in the Bible (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1964).
Gager, J. G., Kingdom and Community: The Social World of Early Christianity
(Englewood Cliffs/Hempstead:  Prentice-Hall, 1975).
Harrison, R. K., Old Testament Times (Grand Rapids/Leicester:  Eerdmans Pub-
lishing Company/Inter-Varsity Press, 1970/1972).
Heaton, E. W., Everyday Life in Old Testament Times (London/New York: B.
T. Batsford/Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1956).
Jeremias, J., Jerusalem in the Time of Jesus: An Investigation into Economic
and Social Conditions During the New Testament Period (Philadelphia/
London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1969).
*Koester, H., Introduction to the New Testament, vol. 1: History, Culture, and
Religion of the Hellenistic  Age (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
*Lohse, E., The New Testament Environment (Nashville/London: Abingdon
Press/SCM Press, 1976).
Malina, B. J., The New Testament World: Insightsfrom  Cultural Anthropology
(Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1981).
Malina, B. J., Christian Origins and Cultural Anthropology (Atlanta: John
Knox Press, 1986).
Malherbe, A. J., Social Aspects of Early Christianity (2d ed.; Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1983).
Meeks, W. A., The First Urban Christians: The Social World of the Apostle
Paul (New Haven/London: Yale University Press, 1983).
Meeks, W. A., The Moral World of the First Christians (Philadelphia/London:
Westminster Press/SPCK,  1987).
*Noth, M., The Old Testament World (London/Philadelphia: A. & C. Black/
Fortress Press, 1966).
*Roetzel, C. J., The World That Shaped the New Testament (Atlanta/London:
John Knox Press/SCM Press, 1985/1987).
Safrai, S. and M. Stem (eds.), The Jewish People in the First Christian Century
(2 ~01s.; Assen/Philadelphia: Van GorcumFortress  Press, 1974-1976).
Stambaugh, J. E. and D. L. Balch, The New Testament in Its Social Environ-
ment (Philadephia/London: Westminster Press/SPCK, 1986).
Theissen, G., The First Followers of Jesus: A Sociological Analysis of the Eurli-
est Christianity/Sociology of Early Palestinian Christianity (London/Philadel-
phia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1978).
Historical Criticism 57
Theissen, G., The Social Setting of Pauline Christianity (EdinburghPhiladel-
phia: T. & T. Clark/Fortress Press, 1982).
de Vaux, R., Ancient Israel: Its Life and Institutions (New York/London:
McGraw-HilYDarton, Longman and Todd, 1961).
Wilson, R. R., Sociological Approaches to the Old Testament (Philadelphia:
Fortress Press, 1984).
Wiseman,  D. J. (ed.), Peoples of Old Testament Times (London/New York:
Oxford University Press, 1973).
*van der Woude, A. S. (ed.), The World of the Bible (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Company, 1986).
Collections of Non-Biblical Comparative Materials
Barnstone, W. (ed.), The Other Bible: Ancient Esoteric Texts from the Pseud-
epigrapha, the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Nag Hammadi Library, and Other
Sources (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1984).
Barrett, C. K., The New Testament Background: Selected Documents (London/
New York: SPCK/Harper  & Row, 1956).
Beyerlin, W. (ed.), Near Eastern Religious Texts Relating to the Old Testament
(London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1978).
Cartlidge, D.R. and D. L. Dungan,  Documents for the Study of the Gospels: A
Sourcebook for the Comparative Study of the Gospels (London/Philadelphia:
Collins Liturgical Publications/Fortress Press, 1980).
Charlesworth, J. H., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha (2 ~01s.;  Garden City/
London: Doubleday & Company/Darton, Longman  and Todd, 1983-1985).
Crossan,  J. D., Sayings Parallels: A Workbookfor the Jesus Tradition (Philadel-
phia/London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1986).
Hennccke, E. and W. Schneemelcher (eds.), New Testament Apocrypha  (2
~01s.; London/Philadelphia: Lutterworth Press/Westminster Press, 1963-
1965).
Kee, H. C., The Origins of Christianity: Sources and Documents (Englewood
Cliffs/London: Prentice-Hall/SPCK, 1973).
Malherbe, A. J., Moral Exhortation: A Greco-Roman Sourcebook (Philadel-
phia/London: Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1986).
Montefiore, C. G. and H. Loewe, A Rabbinic Anthology (New York: Schocken
Books, 1974).
Nickelsburg, G. W. E. and M. E. Stone, Faith and Piety in Early Judaism:
Texts and Documents (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1983).
Pritchard, J. B., The Ancient Near East in Pictures Relating to the Old Testa-
ment (2d ed.; Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969).
*Pritchard, J. B., (ed.), Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testa-
ment (3d ed.; Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969).
Robinson, J. M. (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Library in English (San Francisco:
Harper & Row, 1977).
*Sparks, H. F. D. (ed.), The Apocryphal Old Testament (London/New York:
Oxford University Press, 1984).
Thomas, D. W. (ed.), Documents from Old Testament Times (London/New
York: Thomas Nelson & Sons, Ltd./Harper Torchbooks, 195811961).

--- Page 30 ---
58 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Verrnes, G., The Dead Sea Scrolls in English (2d ed.; Hammondsworth/Balti-
more: Penguin Books, 1975).
*Whittaker, M., Jews and Christians: Graeco-Roman Views (Cambridge/New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Introductions to the Old Testament
Childs, B. S., Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture (London/Philadel-
phia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1979).
*Eissfeldt, O., The Old Testament: An Introduction Including the Apocrypha
and Pseudepigrapha  and Also the Works of a Similar Type from Qumran
(Oxford/New York: Basil BlackwelYHarper  & Row, 1965).
Fohrer, G., Zntroduction to the Old Testament (Nashville/London: Abingdon
Press/SPCK, 1968).
Gottwald, N. K., The Hebrew Bible-A Socioliterury  Introduction (Philadel-
phia/London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1985).
Harrison, R. K., Introduction to the Old Testament: With a Comprehensive Review
of OM Testament Studies and a Special Supplement on the Apocryphu (Leicesterl
Grand Rapids: Inter-Varsity Press/Eerdmans  Publishing Company, 1969).
*Hayes, J. H., Introduction to Old Testament Study (Nashville/London:
Abingdon Press/SCM Press, 1979/1982).
Kaiser, O., Introduction to the Old Testament (Gxford/Minneapolis: Blackwell/
Augsburg, 1980).
Rendtorff, R., The Old Testament: An Zntroduction (London/Philadelphia: SCM
Press/Fortress Press, 1985).
Schmidt, W. H., Old Testament Introduction (New York/London: Crossroad/
SCM Press, 1984).
Soggin, J. A., Introduction to the Old Testament: From Its Origins to the CZos-
ing of the Alexundrian  Canon (rev. ed.; London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/
Westminster Press, 1980).
Introductions to the New Testament
Childs, B. S., The New Testament as Canon: An Introduction (London/Philadel-
phia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1984/1985).
Guthrie, D., New Testament Introduction (3d ed.; London/Downers Grove:
Tyndale Press/Inter-Varsity Press, 1970/ 197 1).
*Johnson, L. T., The Writings of the New Testament: An Interpretation (Phila-
delphiallondon: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1986).
Koester, H., Introduction to the New Testament (2 ~01s.; Philadelphia; Fortress
Press, 1982).
Kiimmel, W. G., Introduction to the New Testament (rev. ed.; Nashville/
London: Abingdon Press/SCM Press, 1975/1977).
Marxsen, W., Introduction to the New Testament: An Approach to Its Problems
(Philadelphia/Oxford: Fortress Press/Basil Blackwell, 1968).
Perrin, N. and D. C. Duling, The New Testament, An Introduction: Proclama-
tion and Parenesis, Myth and History (2d ed.; New York/London: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1982).
Wikcnhauser, A., New Testament Introduction (Dublin/New York: Herder and
Herder, 1958).
CHAPTER4
GRAMMATICAL
CRITICISM:
The kinguage  of the Text
If textual criticism is concerned with establishing the wording of the
text, and historical criticism with investigating the history in and of the
text, grammatical criticism is concerned with analyzing a text through its
language. To be sure, language consists of words, but ideas and con-
cepts rather than being conveyed through words standing alone are trans-
mitted through words arranged in various combinations with each other.
Grammatical criticism is concerned not only with how individual words
function as carriers of meaning but how those words are arranged in
phrases and sentences to form meaningful sense units. This type of criti-
cism may be thought of as the set of skills and disciplines through which
we seek to re-create and enter the original thought world of the author (or
text) through the language of the text.
We may begin by looking at the way in which we analyze the most
fundamental unit of communication-the word. Even though we recog-
nize that the message of a text is not conveyed in and through single
words standing alone but rather through phrases and sentences arranged
in sense units, we must nonetheless deal with single words and phrases.
One reason for this is that when we read a text, we often meet words or
phrases whose reference or meaning we as twentieth-century readers
find unfamiliar, if not unintelligible. This is especially the case with
terms that were used in special ways or with special senses in the com-
munities of Israel and the early church, or whose ancient usage differs
significantly from their modem usage.
While certain words and phrases, such as the names of persons and
places, will be investigated as part of historical criticism, others will not.
Such terms as “remnant,” “covenant,” “repentance,“or “justifica-
tion” receive special treatment in Bible dictionaries and encyclopedias
because of their historical context and their significance in the Bible. For

--- Page 31 ---
60 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
this reason, definitions of such terms in standard English dictionaries
will be adequate only at the most elementary level and may actually turn
out to be unsatisfactory, given their brevity and English-language
perspective.
Quite often, we can begin our analysis of the text by isolating promi-
nent words or expressions that we suspect are important but whose
meaning we may find unclear. For example, in Jeremiah 31:31-34,  the
well-known passage proclaiming the coming of a “new covenant,” we
immediately recognize that the term “covenant” is so central to the pas-
sage that we must investigate it thoroughly in order to understand the
passage. By concentrating on this single term and its frequent uses
throughout the Bible, we can learn more about the Israelite understand-
ing of “covenant. ” As we do so, other aspects of the passage will come
into much sharper focus. Or, if we are exegeting Matthew 16:29, where
Jesus asserts that some of those in his audience would not die before they
saw “the Son of man coming in his kingdom,” we can easily see that the
phrases “Son of man” and “kingdom” will need to be investigated
thoroughly before we can understand the passage. Again, by concentrat-
ing on these single expressions, we can investigate how they are used
and what they denote in the Gospel of Matthew, in other New Testament
writings, as well as in other writings of the first century A.D. As we learn
more about first-century usage of these expressions, we are better able to
make sense of their use in Matthew 16:29.
In dealing with individual words or phrases, three kinds of exegetical
tools are invaluable. The first of these are Bible dictionaries and ency-
clopedias. These contain articles treating important biblical ideas and
concepts, and such articles are usually comprehensive in nature, yet suf-
ficiently specific to provide the exegete with a general grasp of the
issues. They will also provide useful bibliography for further study.
A second type of resource whose focus is more narrow and thus gives
more specific information is biblical wordbooks and lexicons. These are
more oriented toward providing information about the language itself
than about biblical history and culture per se. Single-volume wordbooks
contain useful word studies of important biblical terms as well as
broader concepts to which a whole cluster of biblical terms may relate.
Multivolume wordbooks are available on both the Old and New Testa-
ments, and although based on the original languages, they are quite use-
ful to students who know neither Hebrew nor Greek. These contain
extensive articles on individual words, arranged in word families, in
which the usage of terms is treated historically, from the time of their
Grammatical Criticism 61
earliest usage until the time of their occurrence in the biblical texts, and
even after. Though these articles are designed to provide philological
and linguistic information, they are nevertheless a mine of theological,
historical, cultural, and bibliographical information as well.
A third source for investigating the language of the text is the biblical
concordance. As is well known, the concordance provides little or no
explanatory information comparable to that found in a Bible dictionary,
encyclopedia, wordbook, or lexicon. Its primary purpose is to list the
various biblical verses in which a word occurs. Ordinarily, the line of the
passage in which the word or phrase occurs is given to assist the reader in
discerning the context. For this reason, perhaps the most frequent use of
this tool is to assist us in locating a verse in the Bible when we can
remember only a word or phrase from the verse. As valuable as this may
be, we can make far more sophisticated use of the concordance than this.
In fact, when properly used, it may well become the single most useful
tool at the exegete’s disposal.
We should begin by recognizing that there are various types of con-
cordances. First, some concordances (such as Cruden, Nelson’s Com-
plete Concordance of the RSV) simply list all the words of the Bible in
alphabetical order and under each word the biblical passages in which
the word occurs arranged in canonical order. If, for example, we want to
know all the places in the Bible where the word “covenant” occurs,
rather than having to read through the entire Bible, find them on our
own, and list them by hand, we can simply turn in the concordance to
“covenant” and find that this basic work of collection has already been
done for us. In this type of concordance, however, all the passages from
Genesis through Revelation are listed with no attempt made to differenti-
ate or classify the various meanings or usages of the word.
Second, some concordances are “analytical.” They classify all the
passages in which a term occurs into sub-categories based on (a) the dif-
ferent Hebrew or Greek words that are translated by a single English
word, (b) general themes or topics under which several different words
may be included, and (c) the different senses or uses of a single word or
expression. We may look at these in turn.
(a) The first type of analytical concordance (such as Young, Strong,
and Morrison) enables the exegete to determine which Hebrew or Greek
word the English term translates. This becomes a useful step for doing
further word study, and a necessary one if we want to use the various
tools that are based on the original language.
(b) The second type of analytical concordance (such as Dar-ton) takes

--- Page 32 ---
62 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Grammatical Criticism
seriously the fact that several different words may all relate to the same
theme or topic, and are thus best dealt with as a single group. Since this
type of concordance is more thematic in its organization, it can be quite
useful in investigating broader concepts or topics that may encompass
several different biblical words.
(c) A third type of analytical concordance (such as Lisowsky,
Moulton and Geden, and Aland) employs a principle of classification
which recognizes that even the same Hebrew or Greek word or expres-
sion may be used in various senses throughout the biblical writings.
Accordingly, it groups together all those passages in which a term is
used in a similar sense. This may be shown by key indicators listed at the
beginning of the entry or by arranging the passages in separate groups.
In either case, this type of arrangement greatly assists the exegete
because it provides a natural place to begin the investigation without
having to examine every single biblical verse in which the word occurs.
As we noted earlier, comparative non-biblical literature can be quite
illuminating for understanding the meaning and use of biblical terminol-
ogy. Where concordances exist for this literature (such as the Cuncor-
dance to the ApocryphalDeuterocanonical  Books of the RSV and Hatch
and Redpath,  which includes the apocryphal writings), the same process
of investigation can be pursued in these writings. Frequently, a broad
investigation of a term’s usage can reveal diverse information which
may be relevant to our understanding of its usage in a particular text or
author.
Once we have looked up an important term in the concordance,
located the relevant passages where it occurs, we can then develop
interpretive questions with which to explore the material: Does the
term appear to be used in the same sense in the different passages?
Does it have a technical meaning? Do there appear to be different
nuances in its various usages? If so, why? In what type of literature
does the term occur? Is it always used in the same type of literature or
the same historical setting? Does it have a literal or metaphorical
meaning? Does it tend to be used by one author or in one section of
biblical writings to the exclusion of others? If so, why? Does this pro-
vide a clue to understanding an individual verse or section or even a
writing as a whole?
By asking questions such as these-and many others that occur to us
as we work with the material-we gradually broaden our understanding
of the term, the passage itself and the other biblical writings in which it
occurs. It is through this process of interrogation and analysis that we
begin to increase our own understanding of the passage by actually re-
entering and re-creating the thought-world of the author or text itself.
We can see how this is done by looking at the example we mentioned
earlier, the use of Son of man in Matthew 16:29. If we look up this
expression in an analytical concordance (such as Young, Strong, or
Moulton and Geden), we immediately notice several things. First, the
term tends to cluster in certain biblical writings. It is used most fre-
quently in the New Testament, and there primarily in the Synoptic Gos-
pels. To begin with, we might note that the term is relatively
unimportant, or even inconsequential, in the Pauline and Johannine writ-
ings. This negative observation can be useful because it provides a point
of contrast with the Matthean usage. Second, the term occurs in the Old
Testament in several places, and in several senses. Here, we should note
these different senses (which are already classified for us in an analytical
concordance) and ask which of these, if any, bear on the usage in our
passage. As it turns out, a crucial exegetical question discussed in com-
mentaries is whether the term used by Jesus in the Gospels has a general
sense as it does in Ezekiel, or a more technical sense as it does in Daniel.
Third, if we examine the usages of the term in Matthew alone, we dis-
cover that it is used in at least three ways: (a) in a general sense, almost
as a synonymn for “man” or “human being,” (b) in an eschatological
sense to refer to a figure who will appear at the end of time as judge, and
(c) in a specifically christological sense, especially when the suffering of
the Messiah is discussed. Our task, at this point, is to determine in which
of these senses it is used in Matthew 16:29  and to relate it to the other
two. From here, it is a natural move to make a similar investigation of
the term in Mark and Luke, trying to determine how they are related to
Matthew, if at all. Fourth, we could expand our investigation by exam-
ining the use of the term in non-biblical writings, especially the Old Tes-
tament apocrypha  and pseudepigrapha, asking similar questions.
Here we can see that the concordance provides us a way of examining
important terms and concepts as they are used in the biblical writings.
By looking up the passages and engaging in aggressive and creative
interrogation of the material, we expand our understanding and provide
ourselves with perspectives from which to approach the passage.
Using the concordance in this way recognizes the fact that the texts in
which a term occurs provide the context in which it should be under-
stood. In fact, wordbooks, lexicons, and other studies focusing on single
terms or phrases are prepared using the concordance as the basic tool. To
save time, we may bypass the concordance work by consulting such

--- Page 33 ---
64 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
works first, yet the task of consulting the texts themselves directly
should not be handed over too quickly to someone else. For one thing,
this will make it more difficult for us to make primary discoveries which
the wordbooks may have missed or to critique the conclusions drawn in
the wordbooks. Also, if we skip this all important primary level of inves-
tigation, the resulting exegesis will tend to be derivative rather than orig-
inal. Actually, it is better for us to do the primary investigative work
first, formulate our own hypotheses and interpretive explanations based
on these observations, and then use the wordbooks and similar tools as
checks on our own insights and findings.
We are not able, at this point, to mention all the ways in which a con-
cordance can be used in exegesis. We can only repeat that it is perhaps
the single most valuable resource for the exegete who wishes to do origi-
nal work on a passage.
In using the above mentioned tools, a special problem arises when the
investigation moves beyond the English language to the original Hebrew
or Greek. As noted earlier, the student without knowledge of the original
language can still make use of most of these tools, although knowledge
of the languages will obviously be an advantage.
The following suggestions may be offered at this point for the student
without a knowledge of the biblical languages. First, as mentioned ear-
lier, some concordances based on English translations of the Bible,
although listing the English words, provide the Hebrew or Greek word
which the English word translates, and in most cases transliterate the
original word into English. Thus, the English-speaking student can at
least determine the transliterated form of the original word. Second,
since a single Hebrew or Greek word is usually rendered by several Eng-
lish words, the analytical concordances provide appendixes containing
comprehensive indexes of these terms and their various English render-
ings. The terms in the concordances are coded for making reference to
the appendixes. Third, recent editions of concordances have begun to be
keyed so that they are correlated with lexicons and wordbooks. Thus the
student can move from the word in the English text to the concordances
to the lexicons and wordbooks. This makes it possible to find the word
being studied in a Hebrew or Greek lexicon, even without knowing the
Hebrew or Greek alphabet. Fourth, a student may determine the original
Hebrew or Greek word by consulting an interlinear, an edition of the
Bible which provides the original text of the Bible on one line and an
English translation on an adjacent line.
Moving from the English to the original Hebrew or Greek is not an
Grammatical Criticism 65
easy process, nor is it obvious in every case, but the diligent student who
has access to basic tools for biblical exegesis can make this transition.
By careful use of such resources, and by consulting with those who
know the original languages, it is possible to gain access to this body of
information which will help to illuminate the language of the text.
In performing word studies and using biblical wordbooks, lexicons,
and dictionaries, the student should be aware that potentially fallacious
conclusions can be drawn from such studies. Certain linguistic princi-
ples should be kept in mind to keep from engaging in faulty word studies
and reaching wrongly based conclusions.
(1) Words in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek, just as words in any lan-
guage, frequently possess a wide variety of meanings. Modern-language
dictionaries tend to offer a number of meanings for words rather than
giving a single meaning from which all others are assumed to derive.
Unfortunately, many biblical wordbooks give the impression that bibli-
cal terms had a single basic meaning that was “carried” in the root form
of the word. This assumption is known as the “root fallacy.” Even
though utilized in many studies, this hypothesis about root meanings
should be avoided.
(2) Biblical writers and characters were no more aware of the history
of the words and expressions they used than are modem writers and
speakers. Very few of us are aware of the history of the words we use nor
do we try to determine what the “original meaning” of a word was
before using it. Unless we are historical philologists, such matters are
seldom more than a curiosity. What matters is whether the words we are
using communicate what we want to say. Students should not assume
that “original meanings” exist for words, that ancient users were aware
of such, and that some “original meaning” must be discerned whenever
a word appears.
(3) Generally individual words or phrases are not in themselves the
bearers of special theological meaning. The student should avoid assum-
ing that when a term, even a technical one, occurs that the original
reader automatically was conscious of a host of theological concepts,
much less a theological system. The term “covenant,” for example,
was used in diverse contexts in ancient Israel and its appearance in a text
should not automatically be taken to be a reference to a special divine-
human relationship. Similarly, the New Testament word for love,
agape, should not automatically be taken to mean some special form of
self-giving concern (see Luke 11:43).
(4) An idea or theological concept can be expressed in one way with

--- Page 34 ---
66 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
one set of terms in one text and the same or similar idea or concept
expressed in another way with another set of terms in a different text. It
should not be assumed that ideas or concepts can only be expressed with
one set of terms.
(5) The-best guide to the meaning of a word is the context in which it
is used. This means, first of all, the immediate context of the passage in
which it occurs. If a word has several meanings, one should explore the
range of meanings and see how they fit or do not fit in the context. A
broader context is the whole of the document in which the terms appear.
One should explore how a term is used and what it denotes elsewhere in
the document. A further context is the biblical and non-biblical docu-
ments contemporary with the document being studied. Since the mean-
ing and use of words change through history, one should avoid taking
the meaning of a word in one historical or even documentary context and
assuming a similar meaning in another time or place. We all recognize
that some of the terms used in the KJV now mean something totally
different.
As we mentioned earlier, the language of the text consists not only of
words, but words arranged in meaningful combinations. Consequently,
grammatical criticism also includes questions of language, syntax, and
grammar. Here the exegete deals with the words of the text as they are
combined with each other to form phrases, sentences, and paragraphs as
well as the special problems this creates.
A sound knowledge of English grammar serves as a valuable prereq-
uisite for this level of interpretation, but because English instruction in
schools at both the secondary and college level have de-emphasized
explicit aspects of English grammar over the past several years, many
beginning exegetes encounter a special difficulty here. While such stu-
dents may use good grammar, their knowledge of grammatical rules
may not be sufficiently explicit to allow them to analyze and discuss the
grammar of the English Bible. Because of this, it may be necessary for
the beginning exegete to consult a standard English composition or
grammar book before other exegetical tools will be of much use. For
example, one will need to possess elementary knowledge of parts of
speech and basic grammatical terms to analyze the syntax of a passage.
Questions of syntax and grammar often arise when we try to discern
the meaning of a sense unit. Such questions can surface as we merely
compare two or more English translations and notice the various ways in
which the passage is actually rendered into English. Translators’ foot-
notes may also provide indications of such questions. Two examples
Grammatical Criticism 67
may be noted. In 2 Corinthians 519, the RSV reads “in Christ God was
reconciling the world to himself.” An alternative translation is provided
in the note: “God was in Christ reconciling (the world to himself).”
Consulting other translations, such as the NEB, points up the exegetical
difficulty even further. The exegetical significance is far-reaching: the
former lays greater stress on the act of reconciliation as initiated by God
while the latter lays greater stress on Christ as the locus and agent of rec-
onciliation. The exegete must decide whether the passage is fundamen-
tally a soteriological statement about salvation as an act of grace initiated
by God, or a fundamentally christological statement about the incama-
tion. In this case, the meaning of the words themselves pose no exegeti-
cal difficulty. It is rather their combination with each other, that is, their
syntax, that provides the exegetical difficulty.
A similar exegetical problem is presented in the opening verse of Gen-
esis, which the RSV renders “In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth.” The alternative translation, “When God began to cre-
ate,” is possible because of a different assessment of the grammatical
evidence. As before, the other translations point to the same exegetical
problem.
To resolve such questions, we must inevitably deal with the grammar
and syntax of the passage. This becomes evident when one consults crit-
ical commentaries on the passage where the various options are outlined
and discussed. Eventually, it may be necessary to consult standard
grammars of the Hebrew and Greek languages.
Quite often, it may be useful to diagram the passage. Older methods of
diagramming sentences, used in English composition courses, may prove
useful in this regard, but the system of diagramming need not be conven-
tional or even highly structured. What is often needed, more than anything
else, is for the student to rewrite the passage, diagramming it in a series of
sense-units, in order to see how the various parts relate to each other. In
this way, it often becomes clear that cewin phrases can be located in one
or more places, each altering the interpretation of the sentence. This is a
very worthwhile practice if the text is poetic, for we may discover parallel
structures not otherwise obvious, especially if the text is printed as straight
prose in the English edition of the Bible one is using.
Analyzing the syntax of the passage and assessing grammatical rules
as they apply to the passage should only be done insofar as the text
requires it. Some texts require little or no grammatical analysis of this
sort, while others, such as some passages in Paul’s writings, will be dif-
ficult to understand any other way.

--- Page 35 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
It should be stressed that this facet of exegesis deals with the author’s
world of thought as it is expressed through written words. The language
of the text provides the skeletal structure of the author’s thought and
grammatical criticism assists the exegete in entering and making sense
of particular portions of the author’s thought-world in its own right and
in relating these to other aspects of the same author’s thought as well as
to the Bible as a whole.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Old Testament Lexicons and Aids
Brown, F., S. R. Driver, and C. A. Briggs, A Hebrew andEnglish Lexicon of
the Old Testament (corrected ed.; London/New York: Oxford University
Press, 1952; reissued as The New Brown, Driver, and Briggs . . . Numerically
Coded to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance, Grand Rapids: Baker Book
Davidson, B., The Analytical Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon (London: Samuel
House, 1981).
Bagster & Sons, 1848, often reprinted by various publishers).
Einspabr, B., Index to Brown, Driver and Briggs Hebrew Lexicon (Chicago:
Moody Press, 1976).
Gesenius’ Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon to the Old Testament Scriptures:
Numerically Coded to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance (Grand Rapids:
Baker Book House, 1979).
*Holladay, W. L., A Concise Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testa-
ment, Based upon the Lexical Work of L. Koehler and W. Baumgartner (Lei-
den/Grand Rapids: E. J. Brill/Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1971).
Jastrow, M., A Dictionary of the Targumin, the Talmud Babli and Yerushalmi,
and the Midrushic Literature (London/New York: Luzac/Putman,  1886-
1900; often reprinted by various publishers).
Koehler, L. and W. Baumgartner, Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti libros (2d ed.;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1958).
Robinson, M. A., Indexes to All Editions of Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew Lexi-
con and Thuyer’s Greek Lexicon (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1981).
New Testament Lexicons and Aids
Abbott-Smith, G., A Manual Greek Lexicon of the New Testament (3d ed.; Edin-
burgh: T. & T. Clark, 1937).
Alsop, J. R., An Index to the Bauer-Arndt-Gingrich Greek Lexicon (2d ed.:
Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1981).
*Bauer, W., F. W. Gingrich, and F. W. Danker, A Greek-English Lexicon of the
New Testament and Other Eurly Christian Literuture  (Chicago/London: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1979).
Bullinger, E. W., A Critical Lexicon and Concordance to the English and Greek
New Testament (London: Longmans & Co., 1877; last edition reissued,
London/Grand Rapids: Samuel Bagster and Sons Ltd./Zondervan Publishing
House, 1975).
Grammatical Criticism 69
Friberg, B. and T. Friberg, Analytical Greek New Testament (Grand Rapids:
Baker Book House, 1981).
Kubo, S., A Reader’s Greek Lexicon of the New Testament (Berrien Springs/
Rienecker, F., A Linguistic Key to the Greek Testament (2 ~01s.; Grand Rapids:
Zondervan Publishing House, 1976-1980).
Edinburgh: Andrews University Press/T. & T. Clark, 1971/1979).
Liddell, H. G. and R. Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon: A New Edition Revised
Thayer, J. H., A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: A Dictionary
and Augmented Throughout with Supplement (9th ed.; London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1925-1940; Supplement, 1968).
Moulton, H. K., The Analytical Greek Lexicon Revised (London/Grand Rapids:
Numerically Coded to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance (Grand Rapids:
Samuel Bagster and Sons Ltd./Zondervan Publishing House, 1977/1978).
Moulton, J. H. and G. Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament, Zllus-
Baker Book House, 1977).
trated from the Papyri and Other Non-Literary Sources (2d ed.; London/
Grand Rapids: Hodder and Stoughton/Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1957/
1963).
Zerwick, M. and M. Grosvenor, A Grammatical Analysis of the Greek New Tes-
tument (2 ~01s.; Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1974-1979).
Hebrew and Aramaic Grammars
Gesenius, W. and E. Kautzsch, Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar (2d ed.; London/
New York: Oxford University Press, 1910; 15th printing [ 19801 has a revised
index of passages).
*Greenberg, M., Introduction to Hebrew (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
1965).
Johns, A. F., A Short Grammar of Biblical Arumaic (Berrien Springs: Andrews
University Press, 1972).
*Lambdin, T. O., Introduction to Biblical Hebrew (New York/London: Charles
Scribner’s  Sons/Darton,  Longman and Todd, 1971!1973).
*Rosenthal, F. A., A Grammar of Biblical Arumaic (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1961).
*Sawyer, J. F. A., A Modern Introduction to Biblical Hebrew (Stocksfield:
Oriel Press, 1976).
Weingreen, J., Practical Grammar for Classical Hebrew (2d ed.; New York/
London: Oxford University Press, 1959).
Williams, R. J., Hebrew Syntax: An Outline (2d ed.; Toronto/Buffalo/London:
University of Toronto Press, 1976).
Greek Grammars
Blass, F., A. Debrunner, and R. W. Funk, A Greek Grammar of the New Testa-
ment and Other Early Christian Literature (Chicago/London: University of
Chicago Press, 1961).
Funk, R. W., A Beginning-Zntermediate Grammar of Hellenistic Greek (3 ~01s.;
2d ed.; Missoula: Scholars Press, 1977).
*Machen, J. G., New Testament Greek for Beginners (New York: Macmillan
co., 1944).

--- Page 36 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Moule, C. F. D., An Idiom-Book of New Testament Greek (2d ed.; London/New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1959).
Moulton, J. H., F. W. Howard, and N. Turner, A Grammar ofNew  Testament
Greek (4 ~01s.; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1929-1976).
Owings, J., A Cumulative Index to New Testament Greek Grammars (Grand
Rapids: Baker Book House, 1983).
Robertson, A. T., A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of His-
torical Research (4th ed.; Nashville/London: Broadman  Press/Hodder  and
Stoughton, 1923).
*Smyth, H. W., Greek Grammar (rev. ed.; Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1963).
Thackeray, H. St. J., A Grammar of the Old Testament in Greek According to
the Septuagint (vol. 1; London: Cambridge University Press, 1909).
Concordances
Aland, K., Vollsttindige Konkordanz zum griechischen Neuen Testament: Unter
Zugrundelegung aller kritischen Textausgaben und des Textus Receptus (2
~01s.;  Berlin/New York, Walter de Gruyter, 1975- ).
Bachmann, H. and H. Slaby (eds.), Computer-Konkordanz zum Novum Testa-
mentum Graece von Nestle-Aland,  26. Aujlage, und zum Greek New Testa-
ment (3d ed.; Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1980).
*Bailey, L. R., “What a Concordance Can Do for You ” in Biblical Archaeol-
ogy Review 10/6 (1984) 60-67.
Concordance to the ApocryphalDeuterocanonical  Books of the Revised Stan-
dard Version (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1982).
Cruden,  A., Complete Concordance to the Old and New Testaments (Guildford/
Grand Rapids: Lutterworth Press/Baker Book House, 1930/1953).
Darton,  M., Modern Concordance to the New Testament (London/Garden City:
Darton, Longman and Todd/Doubleday, 1976).
Davidson, B., A Concordance of the Hebrew and Chaldee Scriptures (London:
Samuel Bagster & Sons, 1876).
Ellison, J. W., Nelson’s Complete Concordance of the Revised Standard Ver-
sion Bible (2d ed.; New York/London: Thomas Nelson, 1972).
Even-Shoshan, A., A New Concordance of the Old Testament: Using the
Hebrew and Aramaic Text (Jerusalem/Grand Rapids: “Kiryat Sepher” Pub-
lishing House/Baker Book House, 1982/1984).
Goodrick, E. W. and J. R. Kohlenberger, The NZV Complete Concordance
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1981).
Hartdegen, S. J., Nelson’s Complete Concordance of the New American Bible
(Collegeville/Nashville: Liturgical Press/Thomas Nelson, Inc., 1977).
Hatch, E. and H. A. Redpath, A Concordance to the Septuagint and the Other
Greek Versions of the Old Testament Including the Apocryphal Books (3
~01s.;  London: Oxford University Press, 1897-1906; reprinted in 2 vols.,
Graz: Akademischer Druck, 1954). (See also An Expanded Index of the
Hatch-Redpath Concordance to the Septuagint [Jerusalem: Dugith Publish-
ers, 19741.)
Lisowsky, G., Konkordanz zum hebriiischen Alten Testament (2d ed.; Stuttgart:
Wurttcmbergische Bibclanstalt, 1958).
Grammatical Criticism 71
Mandelkem, S., Veteris Testamenti concordantiae hebraicae atque chaldaicae
(9th ed.; Jerusalem/Tel Aviv: Schocken, 1971).
Morgenthaler, R., Statistik des neutestamentlicher Wortschatzes (2d ed.;
Zurich: Gotthelf Verlag, 1973).
Morrish, G., Concordance of the Septuagint (reprinted; Grand Rapids: Baker
Book House, 1976).
*Morrison, C., An Analytical Concordance to the Revised Standard Version of
the New Testament (Philadelphia/London: Westminster Press/SCM Press,
1979).
Moulton, W. F. and A. S. Geden, A Concordance to the Greek Testament
According to the Texts of Westcott and Hort, Tischendorf and the English
Revisers (5th ed., rev. by H. K. Moulton, with a supplement; Edinburgh: T.
&T. Clark, 1978).
Schmoller, A., Handkonkordanz zum griechischen Neuen Testament (9th ed.;
Stuttgart: Wiirttembergische Bibelanstalt, 1951).
Strong, J., The Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible (New York/Cincinnati:
Hunt Eaton/Cranston Curts, 1894; frequently reprinted by various
publishers).
Wigram, G. V., The Englishman’s Greek Concordance Numerically Coded
to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House,
1979).
Wigram, G. V., The Englishman’s Hebrew and Chaldee Concordance of the
Old Testament Numerically Coded to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance
(Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1980).
Wigram,  G. V. and R. D. Winter, The Word Study Concordance (Wheaton/
Pasadena: Tyndale House Publishers/William Carey Library, 1978; keyed to
Strong, Moulton-Geden, Amdt-Gingrich, and Kittel-Friedrich).
*Young, R., Analytical Concordance to the Bible (8th ed.; London/New York:
Lutterworth Press/Funk and Wagnalls,  1939; reissued by other publishers).
Wordbooks
von Allmen, J. J. (ed.), The Vocabulary of the Bible: A Companion to the Bible
(London/New York: Lutterworth Press/Oxford University Press, 1958).
Bauer, J. B. (ed.), Sacramentum verbi: An Encyclopedia of Biblical Theology (3
vols,;  London/New York: Sheed and Ward/Herder and Herder, 1970).
“Botterweck,  J. and H. Ringgren (eds.), Theological Dictionary of the Old Tes-
tament (Grand Rapids/London: Eerdmans Publishing Company/SCM Press,
1977-  ).
Brown, C. (ed.), The New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology
(3 ~01s.; Grand Rapids/Exeter: Zondervan Publishing House/Paternoster
Press, 1975-1978).
*Kittel, G. and G. Friedrich (eds.), Theological Dictionary of the New Testu-
ment (10 ~01s.; Grand Rapids/London: Eerdmans Publishing Company/SCM
Press, 19641976; l-volume abridged ed., 1985).
Leon-Dufour, X., Dictionary of Biblical Theology (rev. ed.; London/New York:
Geoffrey ChapmanSeabury  Press, 1973).
*Richardson, A. (ed.), A Theological Word Book of the Bible (London/New
York: SCM Press/Macmillan Company, 1950/1951).

--- Page 37 ---
72 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook CHAPTER 5
Robertson, A. T., Word Pictures in the New Testament (6 ~01s.; New York/
London: Harper & Brothers, 1930-1933).
Turner, N., Grammatical Insights into the New Testament (Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark, 1965).
Turner, N., Christian Words (Edinburgh/Nashville: T. & T. Clark/Thomas Nel-
son Publishers, 1981/1982).
Vincent, M. R., Word Studies in the New Testament (4 ~01s.;  New York/
London: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1887-1900; reprinted, Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1946).
Vine, W. F., Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words (4 ~01s. ; London:
Oliphants, 1939-1941; reissued in 1 vol., London/Grand Rapids: Marshall,
Morgan & Scott/Zondervan Publishing House, 195211981).
Interlinears
Berry, G. R. and J. Strong, Interlinear Greek-English New Testament Numeri-
cally Coded to Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance (Grand Rapids: Baker Book
House, 1981).
*Green, J. (ed. and tr.), The Interlinear Bible: HebrewlEnglish (Grand Rapids:
Baker Book House, 1979).
Kohlenberger, J. R., The NIV Interlinear Hebrew-English Old Testament (4
~01s.; Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1979-).
*Marshall, A., The R.S. V. Interlinear Greek-English New Testament (London/
Grand Rapids: Samuel Bagster and Sons Ltd./Zondervan Publishing House,
1968/1970).
Semantics and Linguistics
Barr, J., Comparative Philology and the Text of the Old Testament (London/
New York: Oxford University Press, 1968).
*Barr, J., The Semantics ofBiblical Language (London/New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1961).
Caird, G. B., The Language and Imagery of the Bible (London/Philadelphia:
Gerald Duckworth & Co., Ltd./Westminster Press, 1980).
Gibson, A., Biblical Semantic Logic: A Preliminary Analysis (Oxford/New
York: Basil Blackwell/St.  Martin’s Press, 1981).
Louw, J. P., Semantics ofNew Testament Greek (Chico/Philadelphia: Scholars
Press/Fortress Press, 1982).
Nida, E. A. and C. R. Taber, The Theory and Practice of Translation (2d ed.;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1982).
Sawyers, J. F. A., Semantics in Biblical Research (London: SCM Press, 1972).
Taber, C. R., “Semantics” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplemen-
tary Volume, 800-807.
LITERARY
CRITICISM:The Composition
and Rhetorical Style of the Text
In its broadest sense, literary criticism encompasses all questions
which arise pertaining to the text itself, including i&authorship, histori-
cal-setting, and various aspects of the language and content of the text.
(Many of these issues we have treated in the two previous chapters
because they constitute separate tasks in their own right.)
Historically, “literary criticism” in traditional biblical studies has
had a rather narrow focus referring primarily to source or documentary
analysis. This attitude had its origins in the eighteenth century. When
biblical interpreters became increasingly aware of difficulties in reading
particular portions of the scriptures, they intuited that certain books
(such as 2 Corinthians) and certain blocks of material (such as the Penta-
teuch) were composites of various documents. They were secondary col-
lections of earlier smaller works. The attempts to isolate these various
documents gave birth to source criticism. The tasks of separating out
these sources or layers, of describing their content and characteristic fea-
tures, and of relating them to one another eventually came to be desig-
nated “literary criticism.”
In general literary studies, “literary criticism” denotes a broad range
of topics: the compositional structure and character of a text, techniques
of style, the employment of images and symbols by an author, aesthetic
and dramatic effects in a work, and so on. All of these factors are
involved in reading and understanding biblical texts. The Bible may be
more than literature but it is certainly literature. And in this regard, the
Bible should be read like any other body of literature. As with literature
in general, one must read the Bible with some literary competence and
discretion. We all realize that different reading conventions are opera-
tive depending on whether one is reading prose and narrative or poetry
and verse. Different kinds of literature are capable of having different

--- Page 38 ---
74 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
kinds of meaning and supply different kinds of “information” to the
reader. This means that different questions must be asked in interrogat-
ing different types of literature.
Closely related to literary criticism is rhetorical criticism. Rhetoric is
one of the oldest academic disciplines. It is concerned with how a
speaker advocates a position and seeks to convince an audience or reader
of the validity of that position. Although originally concerned with ora-
tory and spoken presentations, rhetoric was applicable to written texts
since most ancient texts, although written, were composed to be read
aloud.
Most biblical literature is what might be called “purposeful” litera-
ture. It seeks to persuade the reader about certain truths, positions, and
courses of action and is thus subject to rhetorical analysis. Much biblical
literature was produced for very particular situations. Paul, for example,
wrote his letters to address special conditions in the life of early Chris-
tian communities. The ancient prophets as well delivered their speeches
in particular historical and social contexts. These particular occasions
and contexts are what can be called rhetorical situations. Arhetoricalsit-
uation involves an audience, a speaker or writer, a topic or issue of
mutual concern, and an occasion for communication. In a rhetdiicalsitu-
ation, the communicator (speaker/writer) seeks to convince or persuade
the audience to accept some particular interpretation or course of action.
The study of rhetoric was highly developed and discussed among the
ancient Greeks. Rhetorical skills were certainly developed and cherished
in Old Testament times even though we do not know how these were
taught. According to Aristotle, rhetoric was the faculty for discovering
the best means of persuasion. As such, rhetoric was taught in schools as
involving five steps: (1) invention-the planning of a discourse and the
arguments and evidence to be employed in it; (2) arrangement-the
ordering of the component parts to produce an effective whole; (3)
style-the choice of the means and methods for expressing the dis-
course; (4) memory- preparation for delivery; and (5) delivery-mat-
ters related to voice and gestures in the presentation. In written
discourse, only the first three steps were involved.
Ancient rhetoric paid particular attention to the nature of proof in
developing persuasive discourse. Aristotle discussed different modes of
proof depending upon whether they focused on the speaker, the audi-
ence, or the discourse. These different forms centered on ethos, pathos,
and logos. Ethos denotes “character” and has to do with the speaker’s
or writer’s credibility and trustworthiness. Biblical authors’ use of 
ethi-
Literary Criticism 75
cal appeal can be seen, for example, in Paul’s frequent autobiographical
references and in the prophets’ reports of their experiences. Evidence,
such as the quotation of Scripture or tradition or the ever-present list in 1
and 2 Chronicles, lends credibility to the author. Pathos has to do with
the feelings and reactions of the audience. Much of the imagery of the
Bible seeks 
to~~~~~~~~-~~~~i~~~~~~rnotions and feelings and thus to
gain a hearing and a response. Exaggeration and hyperbole abound.
Log~~~~~_~~~~~s~~~~~~~~~~~scourse.  Various
forms of logic, both inductive and deductive, may be found in any pur-
poseful, persuasive text.
In exegeting a biblical text, we must be alert to the literary and rhetori-
cal dimensions of a text. Emphasis on compositional techniques and rhe-
torical features aid in understanding how a writing has been developed,
how its structure and style contribute to its presentation, and what- objec-
tives the writer.may.ha~e_had in.rnind., 1; _--_ ~- -_ ~.
Literary
c
criticism of biblical texts recognizes that a s-J&, pas-
sage, or pericope  generally formsapart c&a-larger whole-the docu-
ment of which it is a part. 
 Asa_comppn~ger~le~_tthepart.
ot4usmto..v&-roleanl..derives meaning from
the sense_ofth~~vhole. A passage in Romans or a n-a&&vein de&is,
for example, can best be properly exegeted when they are viewed as
components within their larger contexts. In these two cases, obviously
the larger contexts are the books of Genesis and Romans. A text, how-
ever, usually has a number of literary contexts. There is, of course, the
immediate context of the passage or its location between what precedes
and what follows. The passage and its immediate context may be com-
ponents within a larger sub-unit of a book and a book may be composed
of several such sub-units. At the same time, however, even a book may
be part of a larger unit or whole, that is, it may be part of a multi-book
document, such as Luke-Acts or 1 and 2 Chronicles.
In attempting to understand a particular text, the exegete should seek
i,
o see the text within the structure of the major context as well as within
t structure of the sub-units. Reading through an entire document, con-
structing an outline, and consulting the outlines given in commentaries
and other works can aid in determining the general structure and style of
the larger work and the compositional techniques employed in its
production.
Ancient authors and collectors, like their modem counterparts, could
use various compositional techniques to give structural outline to their
works and to tie together various internal sub-units and blocks of mate-

--- Page 39 ---
76 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
rial. The structure of individual works might be based on such consider-
ations as thematic interests, chronological schemes (most historical
books), plot or plot motifs (particularly all narrative), particular apolo-
getic or defense argumentation (many of the letters of Paul), alphabetic
lines in which the successive letters of the alphabet are used to give an
external arrangement to material (several of the psalms, Lamentations),
speeches and summations (Deuteronomy-2 Kings, Matthew), geo-
graphical references (much of Exodus-Numbers), association of sub-
ject matter (Old Testament law codes), patterns dictated by use in rituals
and worship (many of the psalms), and so on. Frequently the structure of
a text may reflect the operation of several of these techniques. Often the
shape of a text also reflects standard forms and genres characteristic of
the author’s time and thus is not the special creation of the writer. (This
will be discussed further in the chapter on form criticism.)
The structuring of material was not only characteristic of books and
large complexes but also of major blocks and sub-units within works.
Individual component parts within a document might have their own
particular structure. The text being exegeted thus needs to be considered;rn light of both m_ajor  anld minor structural complexes.
/” Because ancient authors and collector%Z%ii%orporated preexistingc
materials and sources into their works, the structure and outline of inter-
nal blocks of material may have derived from the structure of the earlier
sources. Thus one can encounter multilayered structures within the same
document. In a heavily. edited work like the Pentateuch, the exegete
encounters both the structure of the earlier sources and the structure of
the final form of the text. Ideally, a particular text can best be exegeted
when its place and function can be seen within each of the layers or
sources of the text. Thus a passage found in the Pentateuch can be
viewed not only in terms of its present context in the final form of the
text but also in terms of its context in the earlier sources (the so-called J,
E, D, and P documents). In like fashion, various layers of tradition can
be seen in the Synoptic Gospels. The earliest Gospel writer, probably
Mark, inherited cycles of tradition which were given new meaning when
combined with other materials into a gospel form. In like manner, when
Mark’s material was utilized by Matthew and Luke, the traditions were
again given another context and became incorporated into these works
with different structures and compositional techniques.
Various factors in a document may indicate the use and incorporation
of sources. Among these are (1) changes in literary style, (2) shifts in
vocabulary, (3) breaks in continuity of thought or presentation, (4) the
Literary Criticism 77
presence of secondary linking and connecting statements, (5) changes in
theological and other viewpoints, (6) duplications or repetition of mate-
rial, (7) clearly defined and isolatable sub-units, and (8) chronological,
factual, or other inconsistencies. Utilizing these indications, the exegete
can often isolate earlier sources. As we have noted, much of nineteenth-
century literary criticism focused on this isolation of sources and their
dating and original historical contexts.
Biblical scholarship has sought to establish the overall literary struc-
ture of most of the biblical writings and the sources which may lie
behind and be incorporated in them. As one would expect, disagreement
exists over how individual works should be divided and subdivided, but
discussion of these disagreements in critical introductions and other
handbooks is often quite useful in providing the student with the sorts of
options available. In addition, the introductory sections to commentaries
on individual books often provide the student with information pertain-
ing to literary markers within the text which indicate structural divisions
and structuring techniques. These various markers in the text note such
things as the beginning and ending of sections or transitions within sec-
tions. Some of these are temporal, others geographical or spatial; some
are technical or formulaic while others may be subtle.
As important as it is to consult reference works, however, it is
equally, perhaps more, important for the exegete who has established
the larger literary unit within which the text occurs, whether it is a single
book or a major division within a book, to read this larger literary unit,
not once but several times. This will assist the reader in determining
even more precisely how the passage being exegeted fits into the larger
whole and how it functions within this whole.
Questions of literary function which the exegete should ask are: How
does the particular passage function with respect to its immediate and
larger context? Is it transitional, that is, does it serve as a literary bridge
from one section to another? Is it climactic, that is, does it serve as the
culmination of several paragraphs or sections immediately preceding it?
Is it illustrative, that is, does it function to illustrate an earlier assertion?
Is it extrinsic to the larger literary unit, that is, does it not fit at all into the
literary context?
By asking such questions as these the interpreter is seeking to relate
the passage. to its larger literary context _by~.~stalZ&ng  .connections
within the text. Doing so is an important aspect of exegesis because
clues to interpreting the passage often lie outside the passage itself and
are found in its larger literary setting. For example, if one is exegeting

--- Page 40 ---
78 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Luke’s account of Jesus’ initial sermon in Nazareth (see Luke 4:1&30),
by viewing it in relation to the document as a whole, one discovers that
the passage is not presented simply as another event in the ministry of
Jesus, but rather as an inaugural event. Its placement at this point in
Luke’s account makes it crucial in the overall development of the story.
Major literary and theological themes developed later in Luke-Acts are
introduced at this point, yet it is only by reading the document as a whole
that one can recognize how many important Lukan themes converge
here as well as how they are developed elsewhere in the narrative. To
cite another example, the middle section of Paul’s epistle to the Romans,
chapters 9-l 1, must be viewed in relation to the whole letter. And, one
can safely say, what the interpreter finally decides about how these three
chapters relate to the rest of the letter ultimately determines how the
entire letter is interpreted. If, for example, the exegete concludes that
these three chapters are a digression and thus only incidental to the over-
all contents of the letter, the letter will be read one way. If, by contrast,
these three chapters are seen as the culmination of everything that has
gone before in chapters l-8, the letter will be read another way. Thus,
establishing the literary function of a given text becomes a crucial step in
exegeting the passage.
, Questions of the literary placement and function of a passage can
sometimes be formulated helpfully in another way. The interpreter can
i ask: What effect would it have on the document as a whole if the passage
; were omitted entirely? Would something be irretrievably lost? Or,
:,,  would nothing substantially important be lost? What effect would it have
:on the document if the passage were relocated and placed somewhere
“else in the document? How would this affect the overall structure and
content of the document?
By asking questions about the literary placement and function of the
passage, the interpreter often is able to detect certain things about the
passage otherwise missed. For example, by looking at the immediate lit-
erary context, one may discover that the passage is one of a series of pro-
phetic oracles, each of which has a particular function within a larger
sequence, or one of a series of miracle stories, each of which serves to
unfold some aspect of a messianic portrait. By placing the passage in its
larger literary context, the interpreter will not only be better able to
understand the passage in its own right, its particular nuances and dis-
tinctive content, but also the larger document as a whole. As we noted
earlier, a passage both shares in the meaning of the larger literary unit
and contributes to it.
Literary Criticism 79
By examining a passage in its relation to its larger literary context, the
exegete leaves open the possibility that the author or collector sought
carefully to construct the document as a whole in order to achieve maxi-
mum effect. Quite often, ancient authors employed rhetorical techniques
and devices within the text itself to assist in the comprehension of the
message of the text and to persuade the hearer or reader of the truth of its
presentation. Because the biblical writings were written originally to be
read aloud, this rhetorical dimension of the text was an important ingre-
dient in composition. By contrast, because silent reading is more often
the norm in modern times than oral reading, these rhetorical dimensions
are often overlooked by the modern reader. Yet, they are extremely val-
uable to the exegete in understanding the biblical writings.
The Gospel of Matthew has always been noted for its balance and
symmetry. The author’s fondness for organizing information in groups
of sevens and threes is well known. Organizing the story of Jesus in this
manner certainly made it easier to remember the information, and cat-
echetical considerations may have been one of the primary factors in
determining how the book was organized. Consequently, the interpreter,
for example, should allow for the possibility that the group of seven par-
ables found in chapter 13 represents the author’s arrangement rather than
reflects an actual historical situation. In this instance, giving attention to
the rhetoric?! or compositional aspect of the text will be& directly on
historical questions.
Similarly, because ancient authors were aware of the difficulty hear-
ers and readers had in following an extended argument or narrative, they
would often supply periodic summaries throughout the narrative to assist
the reader in “catching up” with the story or argument. Numerous
instances of this occur in the book of Acts, for example.
Various techniques were used for structuring not only individual units
but also entire documents. A frequently used structural device was
known as “chiasmus,” a principle of arranging materials in a symmetri-
cal pattern where certain components would correspond to other compo-
nents. In a four-part arrangement, the chiastic structure might follow an
a-b-b-a pattern, where the first and fourth items corresponded to each
other while the second and third items did so as well. Another such
device was what is called “inclusio.” This refers to the practice of
restating or paraphrasing the opening and leading idea or phrase at the
conclusion in order to reemphasize the point being made or the position
being advocated. These devices were widely used in antiquity and are
found frequently in the biblical writings.

--- Page 41 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Knowing that ancient writers often employed rhetorical techniques
and devices may assist the interpreter in understanding the structure of a
document. For one thing, the overall structure may be unfamiliar and
incomprehensible to the modern reader because it does not easily fit into
modern notions of sequence and organization; yet, it may fit perfectly
into ancient notions of arrangement. A document may be perfectly sym-
metrical and logically sequential, provided one understands the rhetori-
cal principle or principles upon which it was based.
Another aspect of literary criticism should also be mentioned in con-
clusion-literary mood. Language is often used as much to create effect
as it is to convey information in a straightforward manner. Beginning
exegetes often err in over-analyzing the words and phrases within a pas-
sage without detecting the more subtle ways in which the language is
functioning. The phrase “You are rich!” (1 Cor. 423) read as a straight
declarative sentence means one thing, but read as irony means quite the
opposite. Similarly, biblical statements often convey a quality other than
straightforward declaration. The Fourth Gospel, for example, is highly
ironical both in its overall structure and in individual stories within the
Gospel, and the exegete’s task cannot ignore this dimension of literary
mood. The mood of one text may be liturgical, in which case the lan-
guage may be more poetic, less direct, and intended to elicit certain
emotions rather than convey theological information. Accordingly, how
one understands individual words or phrases in a highly evocative pas-
sage exuding the atmosphere of worship may differ radically from how
one understands the same words or phrases within a text whose mood is
fiercely polemical or apologetic. To read a piece of comedy as straight-
forward narrative is itself comic, and the exegete does well to be atten-
tive to these more unspoken dimensions of the text.
The literary criticism of a biblical text, thus, focuses on the “world of
the text,” its composition, its structure, its style, and its mood. Numer-
ous studies are available to assist the exegete in this type of investiga-
tion. Nothing, however, is more crucial than the ability to read a text
thoroughly, closely, sympathetically, with both an eye and an ear to the
internal dimensions of the text which may serve as most useful clues to
understanding.
Literary Criticism 81
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
*Alter, R., The  Art ofBiblicalNurrutive  (New York/London: Basic Books, Inc./
Allen & Unwin, 1981).
*Alter, R., The Art ofBiblical  Poetry (New York/London: Basic Books, Inc./
Allen & Unwin, 1985).
Auerbach, E., “Odysseus’ Scar,” in his Mimesis: The Representation of Reality
in Western Literature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953) l-23.
Barr, J., “Reading the Bible as Literature” in Bulletin of the John Rylands Uni-
versity Library 56 (1973) 10-33.
*Beardslee, W., Literary Criticism of the New Testament (Philadelphia: Fortress
Press, 1970).
Crossan, J. D. (ed.), Paul Ricoeur on Biblical Hermeneutics (Semeia 4; Mis-
soula: Scholars Press, 1975).
Fishbane, M., Text and Texture: Close Readings of Selected Biblical Texts (New
York: Schocken Books, 1979).
Frye, N., The Great Code: The Bible and Literature (New York/London: Har-
court Brace Jovanovich, 1982).
Funk, R. W., Language, Hermeneutic, and Word of God (New York: Harper &
Row, 1966).
Funk, R. W., (ed.), Literary Critical Studies of Biblical Texts (Semeia 8; Mis-
soula: Scholars Press, 1977).
Gottcent, J. H., The Bible us Literature: A Selective Bibliography (Boston: G.
K. Hall & Co., 1979).
Habel, N., Literary Criticism of the Old Testament (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1971).
*Juel, D., with J.S. Ackerman and T. S. Warshaw, An Introduction to New Tes-
tament Literature (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1978).
Long, B. 0. (ed.), Images of Man and God: Old Testament Short Stories in Lit-
erary Focus (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1981).
*Louis, K. R., J. S. Ackerman, and T. S. Warshaw, Literary Interpretations of
Biblical Narratives (2 ~01s.;  Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1974, 1982).
McKnight,  E. V., Meaning in Texts: The Historical Shaping of a Narrative Her-
meneutics (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1978).
McKnight, E. V., The Bible and the Reader: An Introduction to Literary Criti-
cism (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985).
Miscall, P. D., The Workings of Old Testament Narrative (Chico/Philadelphia:
Scholars Press/Fortress Press, 1983).
Newman, B. M., “Discourse Structure” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume, 23741.
Peterson, N., Literary Criticism for New Testament Critics (Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1978).
Poland, L. M., Literary Criticism and Biblical Hermeneutics: A Critique of For-
malist Approaches (Chico: Scholars Press, 1986).
Preminger, A. and E. L. Greenstein (eds.), The Hebrew Bible in Literary Criti-
cism (New York: Ungar Publishing Company, 1986).

--- Page 42 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Ricoeur, P., The Conjlict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics (Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1974).
Ricoeur, P., Essays on Biblical Interpretation (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1980).
Robertson, D., “Literature, the Bible as” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume, 547-5 1.
Robertson, D., The Old Testament and the Literary Critic (Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1977).
Ryken, L. (ed.), The New Testament in Literary Criticism (New York: Ungar
Publishing Company, 1984).
Sternberg, M., The Poetics ofBiblical Narrative (Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
sity Press, 1985).
Rhetorical Analysis
Betz, H. D., Galatians: A Commentary on Paul’s Letter to the Churches in
Galatia (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979).
Clines, D. J. A. et al. (eds.), Art and Meaning: Rhetoric in Biblical Literature
(Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1982).
Corbett, E. P. J., Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student (New York/
London: Oxford Universitv Press. 1965).
*Gitay, Y., Prophecy and P&suasi&: A study of Isaiah 40-48 (Bonn: Linguis-
tica Biblica, 1981).
Gitay, Y., “A Study of Amos’ Art of Speech: A Rhetorical Analysis of Amos
3:1-15,” in Catholic Biblical Quarterly 42 (1980) 293-309.
Gitay, Y., “Reflections on the Study of the Prophetic Discourse: The Question
of Isaiah I 2-20,”  in Vetus Testamentum 33 (1983) 207-21.
Jackson, J. J. and M. Kessler (eds.), Rhetorical Criticism: Essays in Honor of
James Muilenburg (Pittsburgh/Edinburgh: Pickwick Press/T. & T. Clark,
1974).
*Kennedy, G. A., New Testament Interpretation Through Rhetorical Criticism
(Chapel Hill/London: University of North Carolina Press, 1984).
Lyons, G., Pauline Autobiography: Toward a New Understanding (Atlanta:
Scholars Press, 1985).
Muilenburg, J., ”Form’Criticism  and Beyond” in Journal of Biblical Literature
88 (1969) 1-18.
*Wilder, A., Early Christian Rhetoric: The Language of the Gospel (London/
New York: SCM Press/Harper & Row, 1964; reprinted, Cambridge/London:
Harvard University Press, 1971).
*Wuellner,  W., “ Where is Rhetorical Criticism Taking Us?” Catholic Biblical
Quarterly 49 (1987) 448-63.
CHAPTER 6
FORM
CRITICISM:
The Genre and Life Setting of the Text
Literary criticism, as discussed in the previous chapter, focuses on the
“world of the text.” In that chapter, we stressed the importance of see-
ing a text in relation to the larger literary composition in which it is
located. Form criticism, or better, genre analysis, though not uninter-
ested in the larger literary blocks ofrn~ai~r even books, focuses
more on the smaller literary sections or pericopes.  Genre analysis is that
as~~~~t~~~~~~~~~~~‘exarnines  the form, content, and function of a
particular unit and asks whether these are definite enough and typical
enough for the unit to be classified and interpreted as belonging to a par-
ticular genre. If these factors are found to occur in a recognizably similar
pattern, and if definite criteria can be established by which one can iden-
tify the pattern’s occurrence, the unit may be said to belong to a given
genre. Knowing the genre of a text allows us to know what types of
questions can sensibly be asked of the material.
Form criticism, however, is not concerned merely with identifying
various literary genres and then classifying a particular passage within
one of these genres, as if defining the genre with its typical features will
in some magical sense provide the clue to meaning and interpretation. In
addition to genre analysis and classification, form criticism is also con-
cerned with establishing or determining the “situation in life” (Sitz im
Leben) in which the particular genres were produced, shaped, and used.
The phrase “in life” calls attention to the actual “life setting” in which
forms of expression arose and were employed. This dimension of form
criticism underscores the vital connection between literary genres, their
particular institutional and social setting, and their total cultural
background.
One benefit of paying closer attention to the genre of texts has been an
increased awareness of how directly literary- content are-related

--- Page 43 ---
84 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
/’
to meanin/As we noted earlier, exegesis is an everyday activity in a
more general sense, and in everyday exegesis the ordinary person recog-
nizes the relationship between form and content. We recognize that a
classified ad in a newspaper belongs to a clearly defined genre with its
own set of criteria and expectations. A description of property for sale in
a classified ad differs radically from a description of the same property in
a deed. One is an advertisement designed to sell the property; the other is
a legal description designed to record accurately what has been sold.
Every person recognizes that a certain amount of hyperbole and over-
statement is allowed, even expected, in the former but not in the latter.
Consquently, we read them with different expectations and we interpret
them differently. How we understand the description of the property, in
other words, is directly related to the literary genre in which the descrip-
tion occurs.
To extend the illustration, the modern reader also recognizes,
although perhaps only tacitly, the importance of “setting in life” in
interpreting a document. The life setting of a newspaper advertisement is
far different from that of a legal document bound and shelved in a gov-
ernment complex. The life setting of advertising and selling property
creates a situation which emphasizes the positive features while deem-
phasizing or even ignoring the negative features. Exaggeration is a built-
in ingredient of the life setting of advertising and selling and because we
all know this we tend to allow for this as we interpret advertisements and
sales pitches. In everyday exegesis, therefore, we recognize the inter-
connectedness of what is said (content), how it is said (form), and in
what setting it is said (setting in life), and we integrate all three as we
understand and interpret all sorts of statements.
Form criticism of biblical texts operates with a similar set of perspec-
tives. The exegete who is attentive to form critical concerns makes sev-
eral distinct interpretive moves. In trying to understand the content of a
biblical passage, or what is said in the passage, the interpreter should be
alert to its genre and literary structure or how the content is arranged and
stated. Once this is done, we then try to determine the life setting or the
actual situation(s) in which such a text originated and developed. If we
can determine this, we then try to ascertain how the text functioned in
that setting. All of this in turn assists us in gaining competence in read-
ing and understanding the content.
These two dimensions of form criticism-the classification of biblical
material into various genres and the association of these genres with
sociological realities in the life of ancient Israel and the early church-
Form Criticism 8.5
have been increasingly recognized within the past century or so of bibli-
cal scholarship. In the nineteenth century, investigations of the biblical
text tended to focus on historical, documentary, and literary questions in
a different sense. Historical criticism had come to recognize that many
biblical writings “grew” out of certain historical contexts over periods
of time. Literary and documentary criticism sought especially to detect
various sources upon which the final form of the biblical texts was
based. These approaches, however, showed little concern for the indi-
vidual literary units and specific genres within the biblical text or for the
sociological soil-those typical occasions of human existence-in
which they were rooted and had grown. These came into prominence as
scholars sought to go beyond documentary and historical analysis in
order to gain an empathetic appreciation of how the biblical materials
had been utilized in ancient cultures before they became fixed in writing.
The book of Psalms proved to be one of the first blocks of biblical
material to be analyzed profitably from form-critical perspectives. Con-
sequently, the psalms came to be classified into distinct literary genres:
laments (both individual and communal), thanksgivings (both individual
and communal), and hymns. Other genres were also identified, but per-
haps most significant was the recognition that each of the broad types of
psalms followed fairly clearly definable patterns of content, mood, and
structure. Equally important was the recognition that the psalms, far
from being a collection of hymns, poems, and odes written by a single
figure, such as David, were produced within the community of Israel to
express and address its various and recurring needs. The majority of
them came to be seen as the liturgical texts used in Israelite services of
worship. The psalter was now seen as the song and prayer book of
ancient Israel re’fl;;&i~7’&rZhnes~  and diversity of the people’s life,
especially its life of worship. The psalms could no longer be read as if
they were part of a single genre, “the book of Psalms,” for they were
now seen to be connected integrally with many “life settings” within
the community and worship of Israel. They not only gave expression to
Israel’s faith but also reflected that faith and the life which supported it.
In this way, form-critical analysis of the psalms made it possible to see
how integrally connected are the literary, historical, and sociological
dimensions of these biblical texts. ---‘----- --~-
Just as the psalms “came to life” through form-critical investigations,
so did other parts of the biblical text when they were examined in similar
fashion. The narratives in Genesis were no longer explored merely to
ascertain their documentary sources or their historical value but were

--- Page 44 ---
86 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
viewed as “stories” arising out of and expressing the folk life of the
people. Prophetic books, too, could no longer be read “on the flat,” for
they were seen to contain numerous smaller literary units, each quite
often reflective of different life settings. It became necessary for the
interpreter to be more refined in interpreting the prophetic material. One
now had to ask more than simply whether a text was a “prophetic
address,” but what type of prophetic address-judgment, promise,
admonition, exhortation, or what?
The New Testament writings, first the Gospels and later the letters,
came to be investigated from a similar Gpective. Investigations of the
Gospels uncovered nu_merous..smallefZZ4D , such as miracle stories,
pronouncement stories, parables, birth~st&s, to mention only a few.
The epistles also revealed a wide variety of smaller genres, such as
hymns, prayers of various sorts, kerygmatic or sermon outlines, and
confessions. The impact on our understanding of the New Testament
was as dramatic as had been the case with the Old Testament. The faith
and life of the early church came to light in a new way and many dimen-
sions of that faith and life became visible in an unprecedented fashion.
The New Testament writings were seen as literary productions within
which the reader could now hear early Christians worshiping (praying
and singing), preaching, teaching, confessing, and defending their faith.
If historical criticism succeeds in uncovering the history (of the docu-
ments and in allowing us to see their “linear life,” form criticism suc-
ceeds in pointing to the sociological and liturgical dimensions
underneath individual texts and allows us to see their “vertical life.”
The biblical writings, it was discovered, had both historical breadth and
sociological depth. A given text might be one step or link within a con-
tinuous history, but it might just as well be the proverbial tip, of a histori-
cal and sociological iceberg, with a substructural history and life of its
own.
To be more specific, when form-critical analysis is applied to a royal
enthronement psalm, such as Psalm 2, it is as concerned with the “life
setting” reflected within the psalm as it is with what is lbeing stated
within the psalm. The coronation of a king within ancient Ilsrael is seen
to have been the likely setting for which this psalm was origilnally formu-
lated and in which it came to be repeated on successive occasions. Con-
sequently, the interpreter wonders less about the explicit identity of who
is being referred to or who speaks in the psalm as the “kink” and “the
Lord’s anointed.” Indeed, as it turns out, what is said in thre psalm, its
content, is seen to be integrally related to the life setting w/hich gave it
Form Criticism 87
birth, and the clue to understanding both is being able to recognize and
appreciate its genre. Thus, form, content, life setting, and function are
all interrelated and inform each other in the act of form-critical
interpretation.
A miracle story from the Gospels such as the healing of the Gerasene
demoniac (see Mark 5: l-20 and parallels), to take an example from the
New Testament, is one episode within the overall Gospel story. We may
study the narrative as depicting an event within the life of Jesus’ own
ministry and interpret it with a recognition of the historical setting and
how this event is reported in each of the Gospels. Consequently, we take
into as full account as possible the historical and social setting of the life
and ministry of Jesus in analyzing the story. Accordingly, we seek to
understand demon possession within first-century Palestine, how it was
conceived and understood, but also the role of Jesus in the episode. Con-
sideration may be given to how each Gospel writer used the story. At
this level, the interpreter is still attempting to reconstruct the event
which may have given birth to the story and to explore how each of the
evangelists has employed the story.
A new dimension enters the picture when the same story is considered
form-critically. Form-critical analysis of this text would begin by identi-
fying its literary genre as a “miracle story,” more specifically an exor-
cism. Having determined its literary form, we would then note the
formal elements in the story, or its literary structure, such as the descrip-
tion of the demon-possessed man (verses 2-5), his encounter with Jesus
the miracle-worker (verses 6lo), a description of the healing miracle
itself (verses 1 l-13), the aftermath, including the impact on the crowds
and a description of the healed man (verses 14-20). By analyzing the
formal structure of similar miracle stories, both biblical and non-bibli-
cal, we can determine that the story exhibits a typical pattern seen in
other ancient miracle stories. Once we determine this formal outline, it
is possible to see how the parallel accounts in Matthew 
(8:28-34) and
Luke (8:26-39)  have either expanded or compressed certain formal
features.
Besides identifying the genre of the text and analyzing its formal
structure, form-critical analysis also inquires into the so-called “oral
period,” the time between the “original occurrence” of the episode
within the life of Jesus and the time when the story was incorporated into
the final form of the gospel writing. Form criticism recognizes that dur-
ing this time, this story like many other such stories circulated orally
within the early church. As they were told and retold in the various life

--- Page 45 ---
88 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
settings of preaching, teaching, and worship, they acquired a certain
shape to fit the setting. Within these settings, such stories as Mark 5:1-
20 acquired their present form and content, being shaped by the Chris-
tian community for its own uses.
With its recognition of the oral, preliterary period in which many of
the stories about Jesus circulated, form criticism enables us to account
for variations within the same story as reported in two or more Gospels.
As long as interpreters worked at the literary and historical levels exclu-
sively, it was difficult to provide a satisfactory explanation of the differ-
ences in the content and arrangement of certain episodes and teachings
in the Gospels. For example, the healing of the Gerasene demoniac
exhibits intriguing variations in each of the synoptic accounts. In Mat-
thew’s account, there are two demoniacs,  whereas in Mark and Luke
there is only one. Mark records the number of swine as “about two thou-
sand,” whereas Matthew and Luke omit this fantastic detail. Such varia-
tions are more easily accounted for when we recognize that the same
story was told and retold numerous times on various occasions and in
different settings. In this way, we see that Matthew records one version
of the story as it was told in the early church, whereas Mark and Luke
preserve another version of the same story.
Besides helping us to explain many of the differences we find in vari-
ous accounts of the same story or saying, form-critical analysis also__2_.-
makes_itpossible to de&mrine&e..way,s_ in which the story-ha been__ ____.-.--_----...I-- --- ---____.__.______
shaped, or edited, in the final stage of writing. This allows us to see that
the text, even in its final literary form, also possesses-another “life set---___ _
ting,” that of the author/compiler. In many instances, it is clear that this
setting differs quite significantly from earlier settings in which the story
or saying was used. This final “setting i@ife” obviously must take into
account the author’s own historical, geographical, and social setting, but
also his literary purposes and theological interests as well..This will be
discussed further in the chapter on redaction criticism, which deals more
thoroughly, and intentionally, with the final form of the text and the
author’s literary and theological purposes.
Form-critical analysis has been especially useful in investigating and
interpreting the parables of Jesus. At one time, the parables as a whole
were read as if they belonged to the single genre “allegory.” Form-criti-
cal analysis has enabled us not only to see that there are different types of
parables, such as parables of judgment or parables of the kingdom, but
that their formal structure as well as their content often provide clues to
their original life setting. Consequently, when we read the parables
Form Criticism 89
form-critically, we try to reconstruct the various settings in which they
were used and then determine how they functioned in those settings.
Often their placement in the Gospels themselves provides useful clues.
For example, the parable of the lost sheep occurs in different contexts in
Matthew (18:12-14)  and Luke (15:3-7).  In the former, it occurs in a
context where proper behavior in the church is the main concern, and
there it serves to remind us to care for the “little ones,” probably mean-
ing recent converts. In the latter, it occurs in a context where Jesus is
disputing with Pharisees and scribes about his associating with social
outcasts, the tax collectors and sinners. There it is joined with the para-
ble of the lost coin and the parable of the lost son and serves to under-
score the inestimable worth of even a single sinner. In one case the
setting is catechetical, providing concrete instructions for church con-
duct. In the other case the setting is one of polemical controversy in
which the parable functions for another purpose altogether. It is entirely
possible that these two literary settings reflect the type of actual life set-
tings in which the parable circulated in the early church.
Form-critical perspectives on a New Testament, especially a Gospel,
text thus focus more on the stories as typ&al forms of expression rather
than as narratives or reports about an event in the life of Jesus and seek to
determine how these were used in the life of the church and shaped for its
purposes. Thus form criticism allows the interpreter to understand and
appreciate the role and significance of the faith and practices of the
believing community in the formation of the traditions that the commu-
nity would hold sacred and declare canonical.
/Form-critical- analysis, cgn,. of course, be appl&d_to_entire books and
d
- .__ _____ _____  .---
ertainly is not merely relev~the-omwof materials or to their__  ._.-. ..^.
prewritten  form. For example, apocalypses, such as the books of Daniel
and Revelation belong to a distinct genre. As such, they possess charac-
teristic elements of content, form, and function. Most of the book of
Deuteronomy belongs to the genre of “farewell addresses.” To speak of
the genre of a written work may not mean that the document is devoid of
earlier materials or other genres. Apocalyptic literature often contains
such genres as “vision reports” which we know from both prophetic
and historical literature. Deuteronomy, although a farewell-address
genre, incorporates many other genres including various forms of laws.
We should not assume that every text will lend itself to a complete
form-critical analysis. Some texts may well be fresh productions in that
they have no history prior to the literary setting in which they occur.
Their only life setting may be that of the document itself and the situa-

--- Page 46 ---
.
90 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
tion of the author-audience in which it arose. These texts, which exhibit
typical recurrent formal patterns and behind which we can see prior
stages are best suitable for form-critical analysis.
Commentaries on biblical books ordinarily provide the reader with
genre classifications, but other more specialized studies also provide a
more extensive set of categories. The reader, in trying to classify the
passage according to&&rei’should ask what it is: Is it ,apronhetic  call
WW.-- 3 M-a-psalm of lament? a miracle
story? a let@? a hymn? and so-forth. Even if this preliminary classifica-
tion is provisional, it is a necessary exegetical step since it allows the
interpreter to raise the questions of form and setting. If the text is seen to
be in the form of a psalm of communal lament, for example, the inter-
preter will then need to determine something about its life setting by ask-
ing what circumstances could have given rise to such a lament-a defeat
in battle, a natural catastrophe, or what, and how such a lament was uti-
lized in a service of worship with its various components. As the
answers to such questions become clearer, understanding of the form
and the content of the passage and how it is to be “read” and understood
also become clearer, because all aspects of genre analysis interact with
each other. For example, a psalm may initially be utterly incomprehensi-
ble, until one discovers that it is a communal lament sung by the com-
munity. The various stanzas, and how they relate to each other, that is,
the form and structure will become much clearer, and the interpreter will
be able to read the content of the psalm with much greater understand-
ing. In like fashion, study of typical forms and content can lead one to
grasp the typical life setting of texts.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Buss, M. J., “The Idea of Sitz-im-Leben-History and Critique” in Zeitschrtft
fiir Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 90 (1978) 157-70.
Collins, J. J. (ed.), ApocaZypse:  The Morphology of a Genre (Semeia 14; Mis-
soula: Scholars Press, 1979).
Doty, W. G., “The Concept of Genre in Literary Analysis” in Society of Bibli-
cal Literature Proceedings (ed. by L. C. McGaughy;  Society of Biblical
Literature, 1972) 2.413-18.
Greenwood, D., “Rhetorical Criticism and Formgeschichte: Some Methodolog-
ical Considerations” in Journul of Biblical Literature 89 (1970) 418-26.
Hellholm, D., “The Problem of Apocalyptic Genre and the Apocalypse of
John” in Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers (ed. by K. H. Rich-
ards; Chico: Scholars Press, 1982).
Form Criticism 91
*Lohfink,  G., The Bible: Now Z Get It! A Form Criticism Handbook (Garden
City: Doubleday & Company, 1979).
Knight, D. A., “The Understanding of ‘Sitz im Leben’ in Form Criticism” in
Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers (ed. by P. A. Achtemeier; Mis-
soula: Society of Biblical Literature, 1974) 1.105-25.
*Koch, K., The Growth of the Biblical  Tradition (London/New York: A. & C.
Black/Charles Scribner’s  Sons, 1969).
Old Testament Form Criticism
Gunkel,  H., “Fundamental Problems of Hebrew Literary History” in his What
Remains of the Old Testament and Other Essays (New York/London: Macmil-
lan Company/Allen and Unwin, 1928) 57-68.
Hayes, J. H. (ed.), Old Testament Form Criticism (San Antonio: Trinity Univer-
sity Press, 1974).
Knierim, R., “Old Testament Form Criticism Reconsidered” in Interpretation
27 (1973) 435-68.
Knierim, R. and G. M. Tucker (eds.), The Forms of the Old Testament Litera-
ture (24 ~01s.;  Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1981-).
*Tucker, G. M., Form Criticism of the Old Testament (Philadelphia: Fortress
Press, 1971).
Tucker, G. M., “Form Criticism, OT” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the BibZe,
Supplementary Volume. 342-45.
New Testament Form Criticism
Bultmann, R., The History of the Synoptic Tradition (rev. ed.; Oxford/New
York: Basil BlackwelhHarper & Row, 1968).
*Bultmann R. and K. Kundsin, Form Criticism: Two Essays on New Testament
Research (Chicago/New York: Willett, Clark and Company/Harper
Torchbooks, 1934/1962).
Carlston, C. E., “Form Criticism, NT” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the BibZe,
Supplementary Volume, 345-48.
Dahl, N. A., “Letter” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary
Volume, 53841.
Dibelius, M., From Tradition to Gospel (London/New York: James Clarke &
Co. LtdCharles Scribners’s Sons, 1934/1965).
Doty, W. G., “The Discipline and Literature of New Testament Form Criti-
cism” in Anglican Theological Review 51 (1969) 257-321.
Ellis, E. E., “New Directions in Form Criticism” in Jesus Christus  in Historic
und Theologie (ed. by G. Strecker;  Tiibingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck],
1975) 299-315.
*McKnight, E. V., What Is Form Criticism? (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1969).
Riesenfeld, H., The Gospel Tradition and Its Beginnings: A Study in the Limits
of “Formgeschichte” (London: A. R. Mowbray and Co., 1957).
Stanton, G., “Form Criticism Revisited” in What About the New Testament?
(ed. by M. Hooker and C. Hickling;  London: SCM Press, 1975) 13-27.
Taylor, V., The Formation of the Gospel Tradition (London: Macmillan and
co., 1933).

--- Page 47 ---
CHAPTER 7
TRADITION
CRITICISM:The Stages Behind the Text
All cultures have traditions which one generation passes on to the
next. Such traditions give expression to peoples’ self-understanding,
their sense of their past, their systems of belief, and their codes of con-
duct. Sub-groups within the larger whole may have their own special tra-
ditions. These traditions are passed down in the form of stories, sayings,
songs, poems, confessions, creeds, and so on. Tradition criticism is con-
cerned with both the nature of these traditions and how they are
employed and modified in the course of a community’s history.
Much of the Bible is composed of such traditions and reflects the crys-
tallization of the traditions at a particular stage. In fact, different stages
of the same tradition may have crystallized at different places and in dif-
ferent ways within the text. These different stages may be reflective of
different chronological periods or different theological perspectives or
both. (Within Judaism and Christianity, certain interpretations of bibli-
cal traditions, of course, have themselves become “traditions.“)
Not every biblical text passed through stages of growth and develop-
ment prior to its appearance in a biblical book, but many did. In those
instances where this is clearly the case, tradition criticism offers a valua-
ble perspective and a useful set of methodological approaches for look-
ing at a biblical text.
Within the last two hundred years of biblical scholarship, it has been
increasingly recognized that many parts of the Bible “grew” over long
periods of time. In some instances this growth occurred over a period of
decades, in other instances over centuries. The Old Testament reflects
this type of organic development in many of its parts, but the Pentateuch
provides perhaps the best example of a part of the Bible which has been
formed over a long period of time. It is now widely regarded as a work
which reflects multiple editorial activities and diverse chronological
Tradition Criticism 93
periods. Based on distinctive literary characteristics, such as language
and style, as well as on theological perspectives discernible within the
text, layers, strata, or sources have been discovered in the Pentateuch.
These layers have been designated J, E, D, and P. Much of the New Tes-
tament, though composed over a much shorter span of time than the Old
Testament, reflects a similar period of growth and development prior to
the actual writing of the documents themselves. This is especially the
case with the Gospels.
In both the Old and New Testaments, therefore, a period prior to the
final literary stage of the biblical documents can be recognized. This
period has come to be frequently designated the “oral period,” because
it is assumed to be a time in which the stories and other traditions which
later came to be codified within the text circulated in unwritten form,
being used and re-used within the communities of Israel and the church
respectively. As they were preserved and transmitted, they took on the
quality of “traditions,” that is, they were thought to be valuable
enough, indeed sacred enough, to be passed on from generation to gen-
eration. The term tradition, after all, simply refers to that which has been
handed over, or passed along, whether sacred or not, but in the context
of the Old or New Testament, it obviously denotes those stories and
materials which the communities of faith regarded as sacred and norma-
tive in defining their faith and practice.
Tradition criticism, however, need not be confined to an “oral
period.” Traditions may be either written or oral or both. Even if a
sacred tradition or story at first circulated in an oral form and was trans-
mitted orally through several generations, after it came to be recorded it
still partook of the nature of tradition. It only changed with respect to the
manner in which it was handed on. The “traditioning” process thus may
involve both oral and written traditions. In either case, tradition criticism
is concerned with that aspect of biblical writings where growth and
development have occurred. In some instances, certain biblical texts
have no pre-history. They appear to have been composed by a single
individual at a single point in time for a specific situation. They did not
exist prior to that moment in any “pre-packaged” form, and they only
exhibit the features of previous traditions to the extent that they draw in a
general way on the ethos and atmosphere of the sacred communities or
utilize traditional themes, patterns, or plot motifs.
In other cases, however, certain biblical texts show clear signs of
growth and development. They resemble geological formations where
later layers can be distinguished from earlier layers. When this is the

--- Page 48 ---
94 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
case, the interpreter’s task is, first, to detect these layers of literary for-
mation, and second, having done so, to determine how this has occurred
and why. Above all, the interpreter engages in this tradition-critical
analysis in order to understand better the final form of the text, or the text
which one reads in the Bible itself.
Before looking at specific biblical examples, we should note that the
process of growth and development of traditions presupposed by tradi-
tion criticism can be seen in numerous modem instances which illustrate
the way in which traditional materials grow and develop. Quite fre-
quently, one encounters different versions of the same hymn in various
denominational hymnbooks. Some versions have three verses, while
others might have five or six. Even the same verse may show slightly
different wording from hymnbook to hymnbook. If one is trying to
understand a particular version of a hymn, certain questions become
obvious: Is this the original version of the hymn? Or, was there even an
original version? Is this version an earlier or a later version? Is the author
whose name appears at the top of the hymn responsible for it, in whole or
only in part? How does this compare with a shorter version of the hymn
in another hymnbook? Is the shorter version an earlier version which
was expanded later, or is it a shortened form of a longer version? In such
a case it becomes clear that the hymn has been “traditioned.” It has
originated at some point, been transmitted and modified until it now can
be found in various forms.
It should also be noted that various changes one might detect within
the hymn might bear further investigation. The recent concern to make
the language of worship more inclusive by eliminating sexist language
from many traditional hymns has resulted in numerous revisions, and
such changes reflect both historical and sociological, as well as theologi-
cal, interests. These concrete changes in the tradition may then be
related directly to specific settings in life, and the wording of the hymn
may be difficult to comprehend otherwise.
If we take the illustration a step further, suppose we find the hymn,
not in a hymnal, but quoted in a sermon or an article. This would repre-
sent yet another stage in the development of the tradition, for now the
actual literary setting has shifted; the literary context of the hymn is no
longer “hymnbook” but “sermon.” And, if the hymn is cited in order
to make a theological point, or to illustrate some moral lesson, its func-
tion has also changed. If the exegete is interpreting the sermon, in the
first instance, and not the hymn, then the interpretive process is
extended even further. It now becomes possible to recognize (a) that a
Tradition Criticism 95
hymn is being quoted which was produced prior to the sermon itself; it
had a pre-history, as it were; (b) that a particular version of the hymn is
being cited, and that it differs from other versions one knows or had dis-
covered in other hymnbooks; and (c) that the final form of the hymn
quoted in the sermon is best understood in light of the other versions that
exist, and that this form will be especially illuminated if one were able to
sketch in correct historical sequence how and why the hymn developed
to the final form one confronts within the sermon being interpreted.
The biblical writings quite often reflect similar stages of growth which
lie behind a particular text. Suppose, for example, one were interpreting
the Old Testament injunction to observe the sabbath as recorded in Exo-
dus 20:&11. After examining the passage and noting its content and
structure, one would soon discover another version in Deuteronomy
512-15,  and more importantly that it differed in several respects.
Among other things, one would quickly notice that the Exodus version is
shorter by several lines. Second, with respect to the content, one would
notice that the primary reason for keeping the sabbath is different in each
case. In Deuteronomy, observance of the sabbath is grounded in the exo-
dus deliverence, while in Exodus it is related to the creation of the
world. Further investigation would uncover other instances in the Old
Testament where brief, unelaborated injunctions to keep the sabbath
occur (Leviticus 19:3).
Fairly obvious questions would occur to the interpreter at this point:
How do the two versions of the same commandment in the Decalogue
relate to each other? Is the shorter earlier than the longer, or is it an
abbreviated later version? What accounts for the two different theologi-
cal rationales which are adduced for keeping the sabbath? Were there
originally two, each of which was preserved in an independent form?
Or, were there originally two different settings out of which these two
versions arose, each representing a different theological perspective?
How are these elaborated forms of the sabbath ordinance related to the
unelaborated or other forms? These are the questions tradition criticism
would ask, but it would go further. It would recognize that both versions
of the same commandment represent the final literary form of a lengthy
process of formation and development, and based on observations of
content, structure, and setting, that is, on form-critical observations,
would seek to reconstruct how the tradition of the sabbath-observance
injunction developed. Having reconstructed this “history of tradition,”
the exegete would then come back to the final form of the text in Exodus
20, since this was the original point of departure, and propose an expla-

--- Page 49 ---
96 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
nation interpreting this particular form, and in addition, doing so in light
of its immediate literary context.
Many of the narratives of the Pentateuch have been analyzed in terms
of the history of tradition. If one assumes that these narratives existed
originally as independent, self-contained units then it is possible to sense
some of the stages through which they developed. The figure of Jacob,
for example, appears to have been initially a trickster-type character who
succeeded by outmaneuvering other figures (Esau and Laban). At this
level of the tradition, one would have had folktales of a type common to
many cultures. When Jacob came to be identified in the stories with the
community Israel and his victims with other groups (Esau = Edomites;
Laban  = Arameans), the tales took on a nationalistic coloration reflect-
ing historical relationships (note that the prophet Hosea shows familiar-
ity with and uses some of these traditions; Hosea 12). When combined
with comparable traditions about Abraham, Isaac, and the tribes of
Israel, the Jacob stories moved toward being part of a large theological-
historical portrait of the origin and history of Israel.
One of the most widespread traditions in the Old Testament concerns
the redemption from Egypt. The exodus motif and the tradition of being
led out of Egypt occur in Old Testament narratives, psalms, and pro-
phetical books. It was a tradition that could be used in various con-
texts-in Hosea the ruin of the nation is depicted as a return to Egypt
whereas Isaiah 40-55 presents the return from exile as a new exodus.
The fullest expanded tradition in the Pentateuch is that of the wilder-
ness, now extending from Exodus 1522 through Deuteronomy 34. Fre-
quently, in credal-life summaries of Israel’s early tradition, the
wilderness is not mentioned (see Deuteronomy 265-11) or else only
occurs incidentally (see Joshua 24:7b).  This tradition of the stay in the
wilderness was developed in various ways in ancient Israel-as a time of
trouble and wickedness (in most of Exodus-Numbers, Exekiel 20) or
as a good time (Deuteronomy 8; 
29:2-6; Jeremiah 2:2-3; Hosea 2:14-
15). This twofold development and utilization of a tradition can be seen
in a comparison of Psalms 105 and 106.
Within many of the historical books, the traditions about the election
and choice of David, his dynasty, and his city-Zion-Jerusalem-domi-
nate (1 and 2 Samuel; 1 and 2 Chronicles). These same traditions are
integral to many psalms.
Time and again, Israel gave expression to its self-understanding and
its hopes for the future by reusing and dialoguing with its traditions.
When exegeting a passage influenced by or reflecting such traditions,
Tradition Criticism 97
the interpreter can learn much from an understanding of how these tradi-
tions developed and were used.
From the New Testament, numerous examples could be adduced from
the Gospels to illustrate the importance of understanding the history of
traditions, but a clear example is provided by the Pauline writings. In 1
Corinthians 15: l-l 1, Paul recites a summary of the message which he
had preached to the Corinthians on his initial missionary stay. It is now
widely agreed among scholars that verses 3-5 consist of a pre-Pauline
summary of Chritian preaching, at least one version of it. This has been
established by noting that Paul refers to delivering what he had received
as well as by noting the terms within this summary that are either unu-
sual for Paul or not used by him elsewhere in his writings. The summary
has a four-part structure: Christ (a) died, (b) was buried, (c) was raised,
and (d) appeared. What we have here is clearly a pre-Pauline summary
of the early Christian preaching which he has quoted and incorporated
into this letter. He is not the author of it, only its transmitter or “tradi-
tioner.” Further examination of verses 6-l 1 reveal that at some point
Paul ceases to quote this earlier tradition and begins to speak his own
sentiments. Exactly where this happens, whether at verse 6 or verse 7, is
not clear, but certainly by the time the paragraph ends, we hear Paul
himself speaking, not the tradition.
Operating from the perspective of tradition criticism, the exegete
would first detect this “layered” quality of 1 Corinthians 15:1-l  1, and
isolate those portions where the tradition is speaking, and separate them
from the portions where Paul is speaking. Having done so, the exegete
would then examine other summary outlines of the early Christian
preaching, such as those in the speeches in Acts, and other places, to
determine what state in the history of the tradition of this kerygmatic
summary 1 Corinthians 15:3-6 belongs. Is it an extended form of the
two-part summaries like one finds in Romans 8:34, or are the latter an
abbreviated form? Is it earlier or later than other such summaries? How
does it compare with later summary outlines of early Christian preach-
ing, or confessions say from the late first or early second century, such
as the Apostle’s Creed? All of these questions, properly answered,
would have the effect of sharpening one’s understanding of 1 Corinthi-
ans 15:3-6.  To the degree that the exegete can reconstruct the history of
tradition, both prior to and after the text being studied, to that degree
tradition criticism will illuminate the exegesis of the text.
After examining the final form of the tradition, that is, Paul’s quota-
tion of it in 1 Corinthians, the exegete is then prepared to interpret Paul’s

--- Page 50 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
use of it. Here one would seek to determine precisely where the tradition
ceases and where Paul’s own remarks begin. Then one would seek to
determine the precise ways Paul himself interprets this tradition. Further
discussion of this aspect of the text will occur in the following chapter on
redaction criticism.
Tradition criticism points up an important dimension of the biblical
writings which we have alluded to earlier, namely their cumulative
growth, but more specifically that the biblical writings in many instances
have actually taken up and incorporated earlier traditions into the bibli-
cal text itself. The biblical writings, on this showing, are seen to reflect
the traditioning process, and interpreters, both ancient and modem, who
confront the biblical text participate in a similar activity. What repeat-
edly occurs in both the Old and New Testament is something like the
following: an interpreter, whether an individual or a community, inherits
a sacred tradition, either oral or written, “receives the tradition” to use
the technical term, repeats and interprets this tradition in light of the
interpreter’s own current situation, and then having done so, transmits
this interpreted tradition to successors. The biblical writings both receive
and interpret earlier sacred traditions, but they have also become sacred
traditions, used and transmitted by the two communities of faith, Israel
and the church. What they record attests the various aspects of the faith
and life of both Israel and the church, and quite often how Israel and the
church have participated in this process of transmission is as vital to
understanding the final form of the written text as anything else. It is this
dimension of the text which tradition criticism addresses.
It should be clear how dependent tradition criticism is on the previous
exegetical techniques we have discussed. Quite obviously, form-critical
observations are required before one can attempt to reconstruct the
stages of development behind a text. Similarly, one must be attentive to
both historical and literary dimensions within the text. Even textual criti-
cism sometimes plays a vital role in establishing the history of the tradi-
tion. Tradition criticism, then, must be done in close concert with other
exegetical disciplines, but in spite of its close connection with them, it
nevertheless constitutes a separate discipline.
The hypothetical nature of the tradition-critical task should also be
noted. Those scholars who emphasize this particular exegetical disci-
pline are the first to acknowledge how theoretical and hypothetical is the
process of reconstructing the previous history of a text by isolating dis-
tinctive forms of the text, arranging them in chronological sequence, and
assessing various aspects of the stages of development. To be sure, in
Tradition Criticism 99
some instances, this can be done with relative certainty and with a high
degree of confidence; in other instances, the level of probability shades
off into only possibility, perhaps even into unlikelihood. In any case, all
of these reconstructive efforts are made with a view to explicating and
illuminating the final form of the written text which confronts the exe-
gete on the pages of the Bible itself. The final form of the text, then,
functions as the final norm and control for all tradition-critical
investigation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Lord, A. B., The Singer of Tales (Cambridge/London: Harvard University
Press, 1964).
Olrich, A., “Epic Laws of Folk Narrative,” in The Study of Folklore (ed. by A.
Dundes; Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1965) 129-41.
Pelikan, J., The Vindication of Tradition (New Haven/London: Yale University
Press, 1984).
Shils, E., Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981).
Vansina, J., Oral Tradition: A Study in Historical Methodology (London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1965).
Old Testament Tradition Criticism
Coats, G. W., “Tradition Criticism, OT” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume, 912-14.
Culley, R. C. (ed.), Oral Tradition and Old Testament Studies (Semeia 5; Mis-
soula: Scholars Press, 1976).
Gunkel, H., The Legends of Genesis: The Biblical Saga and History (Chicago:
Open Court, 1901; reprinted, New York: Schocken Books, 1964).
Gunkel, H., “Jacob” in his What Remains of the Old Testament and Other
Essays (New York/London: Macmillan Company/Allen and Unwin, 1928)
151-86.
Jeppesen, K. and B. Otzen (eds.), The Productions of Time: Tradition in Old
Testament Scholarship (Sheffield: Almond Press, 1984).
Knight, D. A., Rediscovering the Traditions of Israel (2d ed,; Missoula: Schol-
ars Press, 1975).
*Knight, D. A. (ed.), Tradition and Theology in the Old Testament (Philadel-
phia: Fortress Press, 1977).
Mowinckel, S., “Tradition, Oral” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, 4.
683-85.
Mowinckel, S., Prophecy and Tradition: The Prophetic Books in the Light of the
Study of the Growth and History of the Tradition (Oslo: J. Dybwad, 1946).
*Nielson, E., Oral Tradition: A Modern Problem in Old Testament Interpreta-
tion (London: SCM Press, 1954).
Noth, M., A History of Pentateuchal Traditions (Englewood Cliffs/Chico: Pren-
tice-Hall/Scholars Press, 1972/  198 1).

--- Page 51 ---
100 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Ohler, A., Studying the Old Testament: From Tradition to Canon (Edinburgh:
T. & T. Clark, 1985).
von Rad, G., The Problem of the Hexateuch and Other Essays (Edinburgh/New
York: Oliver & BoydMcGraw-Hill,  1966).
Rast, W., Tradition History and the Old Testament (Philadelphia: Fortress
Press, 1972).
New Testament Tradition Criticism
*Barbour,  R. S., Tradition-Historical Criticism of the Gospels (London: SPCK,
1972).
Calve& D. G. A., “An Examination of the Criteria for Distinguishing the
Authentic Words of Jesus” in New Testament Studies 18 (1971-1972) 209-
19.
*Catchpole, D. R., “Tradition History” in New Testament Interpretation:
Essays on Principles and Methods (ed. by I. H. Marshall; Exeter/Grand
Rapids: Paternoster Press/Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1977) 165-80.
Cullmann, O., “The Tradition” in his The Early Church (London/Philadelphia:
SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1956) 59-99.
Gerhardsson, B., Memory and Manuscript: Oral Tradition and Written Trans-
mission in Rabbinic Judaism and Early Christianity (Lund: C. W. K.
Gleerup, 1961).
Hahn, F., The Titles of Jesus in Christology: Their History in Early Christianity
(London/New York: Lutterworth Press/World Publishing Co., 1969).
Hooker, M. D., “Christology and Methodology” in New Testament Studies 17
(1970-1971) 480-87.
Pet-r-in, N., Rediscovering the Teaching of Jesus (London/New York: SCM
Press/Harper & Row, 1967).
CHARTER 8
REDACTION
CRITICISM:The Final
Viewpoint and Theology
As used in biblical exegesis, redaction criticism refers to that form of
interpretation whose primary focus is the editorial stage(s) that led
toward or produced the final written form or composition of a passage,
the final stage(s) of the tradition, as it were, that has become crystallized
in written form.
This may appear strange to the beginning exegete who sees this as
fairly self-evident. Is not the exegete’s task to interpret the text as it lies
open before the reader waiting to be understood? Is it not the final writ-
ten form, and not some earlier draft of a passage which after all has been
canonized and calls for interpretation? Has not interpretation of the final
text always been the basic concern?
To put the exegete’s task this way does make redaction criticism
appear to be doing the obvious. This would be the case if other consider-
ations were not in the picture. Redaction criticism presupposes the
insights and perspectives of tradition criticism and form criticism. One
of its basic operating assumptions is that many biblical texts have a pre-
history and that this pre-history can be detected and reconstructed in
many instances with a reliable degree of certainty. Moreover, it draws
on the findings of these other disciplines which have detected and
demonstrated the various ways in which a given story or tradition
changes as it is transmitted from person to person or from generation to
generation or from one documentary form to another. Given these
changes in the form, content, and function of materials the interpreter is
concerned not only to pinpoint such changes but to account for them.
Even more, the sensitive interpreter wants to know how these changes
affect and illuminate the meaning of the story or tradition in its latest
form or version.
Another way of making the same point is to observe that some biblical

--- Page 52 ---
102 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
texts do not readily lend themselves to redaction-critical analysis. If it is
impossible for the interpreter to detect previous traditions underlying a
perhaps better than anywhere else, it becomes indisputably clear that
text, or if a text appears not to be taking up a previous biblical tradition
Matthew and Luke have followed Mark, using his account of the passion
or text and reinterpreting it, in these instances, try as one may, one can-
as their basic outline. Consequently, one can establish the history of the
not demonstrate that an author or editor has redacted anything. At the
tradition in at least two stages with respect to almost every episode.
most, one can only posit that the text has been written by an author, nOt
Once this is done, redaction criticism then seeks to interpret an episode
inherited, interpreted, and transmitted in a modified form.
in Matthew or Luke in light of the way they have edited or redacted
Mark.
In those instances where a given text clearly reflects the use of previ-
ous traditions, texts, or stories, redaction criticism can be a valuable
exegetical discipline. The Gospels provide some of the best exaniples of
such instances, because here, quite often, the same event, episode, or
saying is reported, even in two, three, or four different versions. In addi-
tion, Gospel criticism has made it possible to place the four Gospels
along a historical continuum. Although there will never be universal
agreement that Mark was the earliest Gospel, and that both Matthew and
Luke used the Gospel of Mark as one of their sources, this theory
explains the evidence as well as any other, and in the opinion of the
majority of scholars, better than any other.
Given these assumptions, one can examine a story or saying of Jesus
in Mark, let us say, then examine the same story in either Matthew and
Luke, and on the basis of these investigations pinpoint the precise ways
in which they have redacted Mark’s version of the story. One of the
indispensable tools for doing redaction criticism of the Gospels is a
synopsis. Several good synopses are readily available, but they all have
one thing in common: they arrange the accounts of the Synoptic Gospels
(in other instances all four Gospels) in parallel columns, making it possi-
ble for the reader to compare the various versions of an episode or teach-
ing, noting both differences and similarities. The synopsis should not be
confused with another exegetical tool, the harmony, even though both
types of work are arranged in similar fashion. Unlike a synopsis, a har-
mony of the Gospels seeks to harmonize the various stories into a single,
coherent story. The attempt is to produce a single Gospel, as it were. A
synopsis, by contrast, makes no conscious attempt to harmonize the
Gospels nor to underscore the differences for that matter. It is so con-
structed, taking seriously the indisputable fact that in the New Testament
canon we have four Gospels not one, as to lay these accounts side by
side, making it possible for the reader to see them together. The term
“synopsis ” itself means “seeing together.”
The one part of all four Gospels which exhibits the greatest uniformity
The scene describing Jesus’ death on the cross (Matthew 27:45-56;
Mark 1533-41;  Luke 23:44-49;  see John 19:17-37)  may serve as an
example. Reading each of the accounts carefully, the interpreter notes
that each account has its own distinctive profile. None of the three, in
fact, is identical. Matthew’s account is longer than Mark’s, Luke’s is
conspicuously shorter. Matthew, therefore, has redacted Mark by
expanding it, Luke by abbreviating it. Specific points are also quite dif-
ferent. According to Matthew, after the death of Jesus there occurred,
besides the tearing of the temple veil, an earthquake resulting in tombs
being opened and saints being resurrected. This occurs in neither Mark
nor Luke. Luke, in contrast to Matthew, omits certain features of Mark’s
account, most notably the cry of dereliction, “My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?” Instead of this, he records the final words of
Jesus on the cross as being, “Father, into thy hands I commit my
spirit!” These last words of Jesus are recorded in none of the other Gos-
pels. Another important difference occurs with respect to the confession
of the Roman centurion standing guard at the crucifixion. Matthew fol-
lows Mark in recording his confession as “Truly, this was the Son of
God!” Luke’s account of the confession is completely different: “Cer-
tainly this man was innocent!”
Redaction criticism, rather than trying to harmonize these differences
into a single story, seeks instead to let each account speak for itself. It
also seeks to make sense of the distinctive features of each account in
light of two considerations: (a) how the later versions of Matthew and
Luke compare with the earlier version of Mark and (b) how the distinc-
tive features of each version relate to the theological perspective and
message of the Gospel in which it occurs as a whole.
is the Passion Narrative, the account of the final days of Jesus. Here,
With respect to the former, a redaction-critical analysis of Luke seeks
to explain Luke’s omission of the cry of dereliction. It not only makes
the comparison with the earlier tradition, but also tries to account for the
changes by asking why. Why does Luke omit this cry of dereliction?
Because he found it offensive theologically? Because he found it less
significant than the more comforting statement, “Father, into thy hands
Redaction Criticism 103

--- Page 53 ---
104 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
I commit my spirit”? Similarly, the redaction critic asks why the centu-
rion’s confession is worded differently in Luke. Did Luke simply alter
the form of the confession which he had before him in Mark? Did he
have access to another tradition of the centurion’s confession which
focused on Jesus’ innocence rather than his divinity, and did he choose
to record this alternative tradition?
At each stage, the redaction critic, interpreting Luke’s account of the
death of Jesus on the cross, seeks to interpret the form of the text before
the reader, the final written form, over against an earlier written form as
seen in Mark. Above all, the redaction critic recognizes a distinction
between what is being said in the text and what is being said through the
text. What is being said in Luke’s version of the death of Jesus is that
Jesus died with final words of hope and confidence on his lips, rather
than words of desperation, and that the impact of his death on a pagan
soldier was to confirm his innocence, nothing else.
What is being said through this account can be established by asking
whether these particular motifs are recurrent elsewhere in Luke’s Gos-
pel. The redaction critic seeks to determine whether Luke’s handling of
this particular episode is in any sense typical of how he tells the story of
Jesus and the church as a whole. In both respects, this turns out to be the
case. With respect to the former, the redaction critic discovers that de-
emphasizing the agony of the cross and suffering of Jesus is indeed thor-
oughly typical of Luke’s Gospel. To omit the cry of dereliction, it turns
out, is completely in keeping with Luke’s portrait of Christ throughout
his Gospel. The christology of this episode is thoroughly congruent with
Luke’s christology as a whole.
With respect to the second motif, the innocence of Jesus, the redac-
tion critic examines the rest of the writings of Luke, both the Gospel of
Luke and Acts, to determine whether this too is a typical, recurrent theo-
logical interest, and this also turns out to be the case. Looking at the
immediate literary context, the passion narrative itself, the redaction
critic discovers that Luke more than any of the other Gospel writers
underscores the innocence of Jesus throughout the passion narrative. He
consistently redacts particular episodes in this direction, either by addi-
tions, expansions, omissions, or abbreviations (see Luke 23:4,  14-15,
20,22,41;  also Acts 3:13-14).
What is being said through the story turns out to be consistent with
other features of Luke’s message as a whole: a serious miscarriage of
justice was done to Jesus, the innocent prophet, who died confident that
he would be vindicated as God’s righteous prophet. By noting carefully
Redaction Criticism 105
these distinctive features of Luke’s account of the death of Jesus, the
redaction critic thus allows the text to speak in its own behalf, concen-
trating on what is being said in the story, but also tries to assess the theo-
logical message being articulated in this particular version, trying to
ascertain what is being said through the story.
In some instances within the Gospels, the interpreter may not be as con-
fident in sketching a history of the tradition behind a text, but it should be
noted that establishing a genetic relation between traditions is not always
necessary for redaction criticism to occur. For example, if one reads a sin-
gle story in three or four different versions, even if one cannot place them
in a chronological sequence and demonstrate that one has depended on the
other, comparing each of the accounts will nevertheless reveal distinctive
features of each. Such comparisons, if carried out thoroughly and percep-
tively, will allow the interpreter to see any given account in much sharper
profile. At the very least, then, the interpreter can note these distinctive
characteristics, and try to correlate them with similar features within the
document as a whole, and thus still try to articulate how they reflect the
theological outlook or message of the writer or document. Thus, in one
sense, redaction criticism depends heavily on the insights and results of
tradition criticism and form criticism, but not in every case.
What is important for the beginning exegete to keep in mind is that the
text being studied may exhibit editorial features, clear and distinctive
enough to provide important clues leading to a deeper understanding of
the passage. Whether these are uncovered by comparing this final ver-
sion with an earlier version from which it was drawn, or whether these
are detected by more general comparisons, either with other biblical ver-
sions of the same story, or even with non-biblical versions of a similar
story or saying, matters little. What matters is for the interpreter to let
the text speak its full message, not a message obscured by reading other
versions into it, or by harmonizing other versions with it. This caveat
should be taken with full seriousness, because many readers of the Bible
have inherited a homogenized, single version of the Gospel story, like
Christmas scenes which homogenize Luke’s and Matthew’s birth sto-
ries; this single version succeeds in effectively blocking the message of
the individual evangelists.
Redaction criticism, in particular, has called the attention of modem
readers to this often obscured aspect of the Gospels, although the ancient
titles ascribed to each Gospel in the second and third centuries sought to
underscore this distinction. The “Gospel according to . . . ” was their
way of calling attention to the distinctive theological messages of each

--- Page 54 ---
106 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Gospel. Consequently, we are now in a much better position to speak of
the “theology” of Matthew, even if “Matthew” is now a more shad-
owy figure than he was once believed to be. Each of the Gospels, to be
sure, is anonymous, yet each Gospel reflects a distinctive, definable
theological outlook as it seeks to relate the story of Jesus in its own
manner.
Redaction criticism served as a healthy corrective to certain trends
within both tradition criticism and form criticism as they came to be pre-
occupied, if not obsessed, with the smaller literary units and sub-units
within each Gospel. By contrast, redaction criticism emphasizes the
wholeness of the Gospels, their literary integrity, and seeks to see not
simply the individual parts, but what they were saying when arranged
together as a single whole. Consequently, the redaction critic is never
satisfied to analyze a single literary sub-unit or pericope in and of itself,
but rather, having done so, to relate it to the larger whole. In this, redac-
tion criticism shares the concern of literary criticism which we discussed
earlier, but unlike literary criticism, recognizes the pre-history of the
text as noted by form criticism and stresses the theological perspective of
the unit in light of the whole.
To this point, our discussion has focused exclusively on New Testa-
ment examples, but redaction criticism applies equally well to Old Tes-
tament texts. The term “redaction criticism” is used less often,
however, in biblical exegesis of Old Testament texts. The term was
actually coined by a New Testament scholar in the 195Os,  and in this
instance, was first emphasized as an exegetical technique in New Testa-
ment studies, and later applied to Old Testament studies. The techniques
discussed in the previous chapters were almost always developed in
exactly the reverse, first being pioneered by Old Testament scholars and
later applied and refined by New Testament scholars.
It would be a serious mistake, however, to leave the impression that
redaction criticism as an exegetical technique is less than thirty years
old. As a matter of fact, biblical scholars have for a long time recognized
that the various biblical writings exhibit distinctive theological “tenden-
cies” or portray very clearly defined theological messages. It has also
been recognized that these have to be taken into account when reading
the biblical documents. It has long been noted that the various editors
responsible for the final compilation of the Pentateuch displayed clearly
defined theological outlooks and that these were seen to be consistent
within certain blocks of material. Similarly, the outlook of the Chroni-
cler has been well known and used to account for the difference in the
Redaction Criticism 107
way certain stories and traditions from Samuel-Kings are interpreted in
this work. David, for example, is portrayed in a far more realistic fash-
ion in 1 and 2 Samuel than in 1 Chronicles. The Chronicler reinterpreted
these earlier stories and repainted the portrait of David and his time to
present both in an idealistic light. The two resulting portraits are notice-
ably different, a difference that has long been obvious to scholars. Thus,
from this perspective, one could say that redaction criticism is not a new
methodology but simply a more self-conscious form of an older type of
criticism which has developed in light of form and tradition criticisms.
If we take an example of this older form of criticism and contrast this
with a redactional-critical perspective, we can see something of the differ-
ence resulting from this greater self-consciousness. Scholars have long
noted that in 1 Samuel 8-12 there are two basic attitudes (and probably
sources) related to the origin of the monarchy. One is pro-monarchy
(9: l-10: 16; 11: 1-15) and the other is anti-monarchy (8: l-22; 10: 17-27;
12:1-25).  Most older interpreters were content to point out these differ-
ences, to work on their possible connections with other sources, and to try
to associate the different views with different historical periods or groups.
Redaction criticism, however, carries the issues further and asks such
questions as: What are the consequences of the manner in which these
materials have been redacted in their final form? What significance is
there to the fact that the pro-monarchy materials have been “enveloped”
and intersected with anti-monarchy materials? From such questions, one
can see that obviously the anti-monarchy materials have been given domi-
nance so that the final form of 1 Samuel 8-12 has been redacted to place
qualifications on the historical institution of the monarchy. Redaction crit-
icism, however, would further note that 1 Samuel 8-12 forms part of the
books of 1 and 2 Samuel and brings this phenomenon into the picture. In 1
Samuel 1: l-10 and 2 Samuel 22: l-23:7, one encounters three poems on
kingship which have been redacted into their present location. These
poems, again in “envelope” fashion, tend to modify the restrictions
placed on kingship in 1 Samuel 8-12 but do so in idealistic and “messi-
anic” terms. In describing the theology of kingship found in 1 and 2
Samuel, all of these, but especially the redactional activity, would need to
be considered.
Opportunities to apply redactional perspectives appear throughout the
Old Testament. For example, what significance is there to the fact that
the Pentateuch (with its laws) ends before the people enter the land? Was
the material redacted in this way to stress the torah (the law) as the ele-
ment constitutive of the society? Was ‘it to address a community in
., .,,

--- Page 55 ---
108 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
“exile” away from the land? Or to emphasize that obedience to the law
is prerequisite to possession of the land? What significance has the
redacted form of the prophetical books? What impact does the associa-
tion of all the material in the book of Isaiah, from such diverse periods,
have on the reading of a text in Isaiah?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Old Testament Redaction Criticism
*Blenkinsopp, J., Prophecy and Canon: A Contribution to the Study ofJewish
Origins (Notre Dame/London: University of Notre Dame Press, 1977).
Coote, R. B., Amos Among the Prophets: Composition and Theory (Philadel-
phia: Fortress Press, 1981).
March, W. E., “Redaction Criticism and the Formation of Prophetic Books ” in
Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers (1977) 87-101.
Mayes, A. D. H., The Story of Israel Between Settlement and Exile: A Redac-
tional Study of the Deuteronomistic History (London: SCM Press, 1983).
Nelson, R. D., The Double Redaction of the Deuteronomistic History (Sheffield:
JSOT Press, 1981).
Noth, M., The Deuteronomistic History (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1981).
Rendsburg, G. A., The Redaction of Genesis (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns,
1985).
*Wharton, J. A., “Redaction Criticism, OT” in Interpreter’s Dictionary ofthe
Bible, Supplementary Volume, 729-32.
New Testament Redaction Criticism
Bomkamm, G., G. Barth and H. J. Held, Tradition and Interpretation in Mut-
thew (London/Philadelphia: SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1963).
Conzelmann, H., The Theology of St. Luke (London/New York: Faber and
Faber/Harper&Row, 1960/1961).
Forma, R. T., “Redaction Criticism, NT” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume, 733-35.
Lightfoot, R. H., History and Interpretation in the Gospels (London/New York:
Hodder and Stoughton/Harper & Brothers, 1935).
Marxsen, W., Mark the Evangelist: Studies on the Redaction History of the Gos-
pel (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969).
*Perrin, N., What is Redaction Criticism? (Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/
SPCK, 1969/1970).
*Rohde, J., Rediscovering the Teaching of the Evangelists (London/Philadel-
phia: SCM Press/Westminster Press, 1968).
Stein, R. H., “What is Rcdaktionsgeschichte?”in Journal of Biblical Literature
88 (1969) 45-56.
Representative Biblical Theologies
*Bultmann,  R., Theology of the New Tcsfumant (2 ~01s.;  New York/London:
Charles Scribner’s Sons/SCM Press, 1951-195511952-1955).
Redaction Criticism 109
Childs, B. S., Old Testament Theology in a Canonical Context (London/Phila-
delphia:  SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1985/1986).
Eichrodt, W., Theology of the Old Testament (2 ~01s.; Philadelphia/London:
Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1961-1967).
*Goppelt,  L., Theology of the New Testament (2 ~01s.; Grand Rapids/London:
Eerdmans Publishing Company/SPCK, 1981-1983).
Kiimmel, W. G., The Theology of the New Testament According to Its Major
Witnesses: Jesus-Paul-John (Nashville/London: Abingdon Press/SCM Press,
1973/1976).
Ladd, G. E., A Theology of the New Testament (Grand Rapids/London:
Eerdmans Publishing Company/Lutterworth Press, 1974/1975).
*van Rad, G., Old Testament Theology (2 ~01s.; Edinburgh/New York: Oliver
& Boyd/Harper & Row, 1962-1965).
*Terrien,  S. L., The Elusive Presence: Toward a New Biblical Theology (San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1978).

--- Page 56 ---
CHAPTER 9
STRUCTURALIST
CRITICISM:The Universals in the Text
Most of the methods we have considered in the preceding chapters are
primarily historical in orientation. They are employed as an aid in read-
ing and analyzing the text, as the means to understanding the author and
the author’s thought and intention in terms of the author’s time and place
or historical context. This is the case even if a text is not considered the
product of a particular author but rather the result of a communal effort
or process. The goal still remains the same, namely, the desire to under-
stand the text in light of the temporal process or historical/personal
developments that produced the text.
In terms of our diagram on page 25, these historical methods focus on
(1) the originator of the text, (2) the original audience, and (3) the uni-
verse of ideas and events (the historical conditions and circumstances)
the two shared. Exegesis is seen as the process through which the reader
reads, examines, and listens to the words of the text as a medium com-
municating the author’s message. The text serves as a conduit or vehicle
for the author’s thought. The exegete asks, “What did the author intend
to say to the reader(s) through the text?” The text serves as the means
through which the reader understands the author. However much the text
lies in the forefront, ultimately the reader’s task is to “get through” or
“get behind” the text to the author’s intended message. The text serves
not as an end in itself but the means to a “more important” end-under-
standing the author and the author’s intention. The various forms of his-
torical criticism tend to use the text as a window through which the
interpreter looks at other referents (the author, the author’s intention, the
setting, the context).
Within the last few decades, a method for studying texts in non-histor-
ical and atemporal fashion has developed. This approach is “structural-
ist criticism. ” The name derives from a methodology developed for
Structuralist Criticism 111
analyzing any type of human and social phenomena and activities.
Structuralism has been applied in a wide variety of fields including gen-
eral anthropology, linguistics, and literature.
Several basic assumptions underlie all structuralist studies. Structural-
ist research assumes that all social activity is governed by abstract con-
ventions, convictions, and rules. These constitute the foundational
structures of all cultural systems and manifest themselves in all forms of
human social activity. Humans have an innate capacity both for structur-
ing existence and for creating patterns of meaning. Polarities and binary
oppositions play important roles in the structuring process. That is, pat-
terns and structures are conceived in such categories as left/right, good/
bad, up/down, subject/object, light/darkness, male/female, and so on.
These structures need not necessarily be perceived consciously but may
function at the unconscious or subconscious level. Some structures and
structural patterns are universal and thus are shared across diverse cul-
tural and linguistic boundaries. All social activity, even art and litera-
ture, embody and reflect numerous structures. The structural features
that are easily perceived are referred to as “surface structures.” Speech,
for example, reflects certain surface structures that the ordinary person
associates with proper use of language and correct grammar and syntax.
The use of any language, however, is based also on very complex lin-
guistic structures. Such complex structures are referred to as “deep
structures.” Thus a person may use and recognize proper speech and be
aware of the “surface structures” associated with a language but have
no knowledge of the complex grammatical and linguistic structures-the
“deep structures”-that underlie the proper use and function of
language.
Structuralists assume that literature reflects both surface structures
and deep structures. The “deep structures” are reflective of structural
patterns that transcend time and space but can be abstracted from speci-
mens of literature. In structuralist interpretation, a text is viewed more as
a mirror than as a window. As a mirror, the text reflects universally
shared structures and concerns. Thus texts have an integrity of their own
apart from the circumstances in which they originated. In structuralist
interpretations, a text stands on its own regardless of the text’s origins or
past and is to be interpreted without concern for the author’s assumed
original intention. Generic considerations dominate over genetic consid-
erations, not so much because structuralists deny genetic factors but
because historical/genetic issues can blur the perception of generic
features.

--- Page 57 ---
112 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
Structuralists are as interested in how texts communicate and have
meaning as in what they communicate and mean. They emphasize such
questions as the following: How does a particular text produced under
particular cultural constraints embody and give expression to universal
concerns? How does a reader decode the text or how does the text com-
municate its deep structure to resonate with the deep structures of the
reader? For structural literary critics, emphasis falls on the text and the
reader and the process of reading and understanding rather than on such
matters as writing and the author’s intention.
It is important for us not only to note the differences between struc-
turalist and other kinds of interpretation, but also to understand more
fully some of the underlying exegetical assumptions of structuralism.
Two major emphases are especially important.
(1) According to structuralist criticism, a text is to be considered ahis-
torical  or perhaps more accurately atemporal. The structuralist critic
reads a text without reference to the element of time; in fact, every effort
is made to exclude the dimension of time unless it is a particular concern
of the text. This is in sharp contrast to earlier methods we have dis-
cussed, where we have come to a text tacitly assuming that we can and
should distinguish between an ancient text and a modern reader. This
fundamental assumption, which gives rise to efforts to distinguish
between what the text meant and what the text means, is simply not a
concern of the structuralist critic. Rather, when we read a text, we
should assume nothing more than that it exists. In this sense, any text we
read is timeless. The text exists in its own right and is to be interpreted
on its own terms. Whereas traditional form-criticism, for example, asks
questions about origin and original function, structuralism asks ques-
tions about the text’s underlying assumptions, universal concerns, and
its present function in the reader-text relationship.
Those accustomed to interpreting texts according to more traditional
methods of exegesis may find this atemporal approach difficult to appre-
ciate, yet it is fundamental in explaining certain basic features of the
structuralist critical approach to a biblical text. Two such features should
be noted.
First, structuralists are interested only in the final form of the text. It is
the text as a finished product that sets the agenda for the structuralist
critic. Structuralists have no interest in inquiring into the pre-history of
the text, distinguishing between earlier and later forms of the text, or try-
ing to identify parts of the text that might be later interpolations or the
work of later redactors or editors. Obviously, structuralist critics recog-
Structuralist Criticism 113
nize that a text may exist in different recensions or versions, as we saw in
our dicussion  of textual criticism, but this is inconsequential. The basic
exegetical move is to accept a text and work with it as a finished piece.
How it came to have its present form is immaterial; what is important is
what lies before us as a finished work, awaiting interpretation.
Second, the atemporal or timeless view of a text also explains why
structuralist critics interpret a text without any reference to its historical
setting. Obviously structuralists assume that a text was written by some-
one, at some time, in some place and setting. But these are of no concern
in structuralist criticism. In structuralist criticism, author, original audi-
ence, and historical setting are bracketed out. There is no attempt made
to answer, or be concerned with, the traditional questions: “Who wrote
it?” “To whom was it written?” “When? Where? How? Why?”
“Under what circumstances?”
This emphasis on the text itself without regard for its original histori-
cal setting means that we must reconstrue how we understand a text to
convey meaning. Whatever meaning is being conveyed through the text
is not being conveyed from an author through the text, but from the text
itself.
This concern for the text in and of itself is described as structuralism’s
preference for synchronic over diachronic analysis. Literally, these two
frequently used terms mean “with or at the same time” and “through
time” respectively. Diachronic analysis presupposes that we can con-
ceive of a text as having existed and developed “through time.” It pre-
supposes a historical perspective in which time is a central element. If
we do a diachronic word study, for example, we look at such things as
etymology, and trace the use of the word, its development and meaning
historically, or through time. Diachronic analysis implies a linear model
of investigation, one that allows us to chart development and progress
along a time line. Synchronic analysis, by contrast, is atemporal or ahis-
torical and considers a literary work to possess its own meaning. When
we compare things synchronically, we do so without any reference to
time. For example, if we engage in synchronic analysis of two literary
motifs or themes, one from Genesis the other from Acts, we do so not as
if one is earlier and one later, but as if they were both “together in
time.” It has been noted that a better designation than synchronic might
be achronic, that is, “without time” or without reference to time.
(2) Structuralist criticism, as we have noted, is based on a view of
reality that seeks to understand all forms of human experience and
behavior as concrete manifestations of certan ordering principles or
,, ,,,, ,,

--- Page 58 ---
114 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
structures that are considered universals. Several things follow from
this.
First, the structuralist critic operates with an expanded understanding
of the concept “language.” Rather than seeing language as communica-
tion through words, structuralists understand “language” to include any
set of ordered symbols, verbal or non-verbal, through which meaning is
conveyed. It is in this sense that they understand all forms of social
behavior to reflect underlying “languages” or patterns of language. To
the degree that customs of dress are uniform within a given society and
conform to well-established, well-accepted rules, we can speak of a
“language of dress.” The rules governing what to wear and what not to
wear, and when to wear it, are comparable to the rules of grammar and
syntax that govern what, when, and how we speak or write. We might
conceive kinship patterns in a similar fashion. Within a given society,
family or tribe, relationships between persons are based on certain estab-
lished, accepted principles. On the basis of these, persons within a given
social group relate to each other and make basic decisions, such as
whom they can and cannot marry. In one sense, the persons within this
social group may be thought of as the “words” of a language whose
arrangement and placement are based on certain principles of “social
syntax and grammar.”
Second, not only is language understood in a very broad sense, but
also the language of any given text is seen to contain varying levels of
meanings. Accordingly, structuralists distinguish between “surface
structures” and “deep structures” in the reading of a text. Beneath the
surface structure, a text reflects deep structures of conviction and world-
ordering. These deep structures are understood as being encoded so that
the exegete must understand that the language of a text is functioning as
a code. It should be read and analyzed not with a view to determining the
referent in any given case, but with a view to determining the “deep
structures” from which it ultimately stems and to which it points. Sur-
face structure refers to those contours of a text or piece of writing we can
visibly trace, such as the outline of an argument or the flow of a story.
Deep structures, by contrast, are those underlying, ordering principles
and features that come to concrete expression in the text, but are not
actually stated in the text. To return to our earlier example, we may use
good principles of grammar as we speak without ever being conscious of
the rules of syntax by which we are arranging our words. Or we may
choose not to wear a bathrobe to work without ever thinking consciously
of the underlying “social syntax” we are following. And yet the under-
Structuralist Criticism 115
lying principles of grammar and syntax that govern what we say and
wear can be deduced from our actual use of language and our customs of
dress.
Third, one of the fundamental structuralist principles used to interpret
all empirical forms of social behavior and their deep structures is the
principle of binary opposition. In analyzing texts, structuralist critics
work with categories of opposites, especially those they have observed
in a wide variety of texts. Certain pairs of opposites are considered fun-
damental to all human experience and may be at work in producing any
given text. This would include such binary opposites as light/darkness,
good/evil, reconciliation/alienation, divine/human, male/female, and
others.
The principle of binary opposition applies not only to deep structures
but to structuralist method generally. Thus, even in analyzing the sur-
face structures of a text, we can be especially alert to pairs of opposites
in the arrangement of the text.
Now that we have considered some of the general perspectives and
principles of structuralist criticism, we can examine some examples of
how it has been applied to biblical texts.
A classical example of structuralist exegesis as applied to the Old Tes-
tament has to do with the creation story in Genesis l-2. Instead of ana-
lyzing the opening chapters of Genesis in terms of classical source
criticism and the theory of two creation accounts (l:l-2:4a [P] and
2:4b-25 [J]) with their respective theologies, one structuralist approach
concludes that Genesis l:l-2:l should be the basic unit in interpreta-
tion. This analysis is based on the following structuralist observations:
(1) The unit is naturally defined this way since it begins with a reference
to God’s creating the heavens and earth (1:l) and concludes by noting
that the “heavens and the earth were finished” (2:l). (2) The phrase
“and God said” occurs ten times (verses 3,6,9, 11,14,20,24,26,28,
and 29). (3) The unit divides into two roughly equal parts with five uses
of the expression “and God said” in each: l:l-19 (containing 207
Hebrew words) and 1:20-2:l (containing 206 words). The first part
describes the creation of the world’s inanimate order; the second part
describes the creation of the world’s living beings. (4) Each half moves
toward a similar climax: the first part concluding with a reference to the
sun, moon, and stars to rule over the heavens, the second part with
humanity to rule over the earth.
Here we see illustrated some of the principles of structuralist exegesis.
First, the structures of the text reflect the subject matter and theology of

--- Page 59 ---
116 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
the material. Second, the principle of binary opposition is evident
throughout: two roughly equal literary units, inanimate orders/animate
orders, rule of luminaries over the inanimate world/rule of humans over
the animate world. Third, the focus is on how one reads a text instead of
how the author writes a text. How the reader perceives meaning in the
text is more important than what the author originally intended.
This structuralist interpretation of Genesis 1: l-2: 1 tends to remain at
the surface level of the text. Texts may be analyzed to reveal deeper
structures, namely, universal patterns of values and convictions. On the
basis of folklore studies, a narrative grid has been developed for use in
interpreting narrative structures. The grid may be used to determine the
structural relationships that appear in narratives (how many appear in
any single narrative depends on the story’s complexity). Based on this
grid, the following chart diagrams the typical roles (called actants  by
structuralists) present in the narrative structures of most stories, although
not all roles are reflected in every story:
sender b object b recipient
t
helper * sub[ject 4 opponent
The sender is the originator of an action meant to communicate or trans-
mit some object the recipient needs, to ensure the latter’s well-being.
The subject is the one sent by the sender to transmit the object to the
recipient. The opponent attempts to frustrate the action while the helper
assists the subject in carrying out the action.
An analysis of the narrative structure of the Parable of the Good
Samaritan (Luke 10:30-35),  for example, shows the following actants in
the narrative:
sender
(God?)
e object
(well-being)
w recipient
(wounded person)
t
helper b subject * opponent
(innkeeper) (Samaritan) (robbers)
In most narratives (and one can experiment with typical modern plots
such as the American Western or TV situation shows), the characters
Structuralist Criticism 117
and plots possess a remarkable consistency. In most narratives, life’s
normalcy or equilibrium is disturbed in some fashion and anarchy or
trouble develops. Some subject is sent or takes action to restore order/
well-being, is opposed by the creator of the anarchy or other opponents,
and is assisted by a helper or helpers.
The Parable of the Prodigal Son consists of two parts, the first focus-
ing on the prodigal son, the second on the elder brother. Interpreters
have often wondered about the relationship between these two parts,
even speculating that the story originally ended with the return of the
prodigal and that the elder brother episode might have been added later
as a way of addressing the Pharisees, or some other group of opponents
of early Christianity.
As we have seen previously, structuralist critics eschew approaching
the text this way. Their concern is with the story in its present form, the
final form of the text. Since it now exists with the elder brother episode,
it must be interpreted in that form. In this form, the story may be seen as
reflecting a basic folk tale plot, or it may be seen as the story of a charac-
ter who moves through a sequence of “at home,” “away from home,”
and “at home.” Binary oppositions may be seen in various sets of oppo-
sites: lostnesslfoundness,  alienation/reconciliation, presence/absence.
In fact, one way of structuring the story is to trace the movement from
presence (the young man at home) to absence (the young man away from
home) to presence (the young man back at home) to absence (the elder
brother ironically not “at home” with the father). In this way, the
younger brother would typify “presence” or “foundness” while the
elder brother would typify “absence” or “lostness.” The important
point to note is that we are not concerned with how the story functions in
the Gospel of Luke, nor with how it reflects the theology of the author of
Luke, but rather with how the structures of the story itself function to
express meaning in universal categories.
On occasion, plots and characters may startle the reader by their
departure from the expected. For example, in the Parable of the Good
Samaritan, the Samaritan is the outsider, the heretic, the opposite of
what ancient Jewish culture would assume to be the ideal religious per-
son, yet in the story the Samaritan is the subject who brings aid to the
recipient (the wounded). In the story of Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac
(Gen. 22), God plays two major roles: the deity is the opponent who
demands the sacrifice of Isaac and thus produces anarchy and simultane-
ously the subject who provides the substitute and alleviates the tension.
In the narrative of Jacob’s wrestling with the angel (God) at the ford of

--- Page 60 ---
118 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
the Jabbok River (Genesis 32:22-32),  Jacob is the hero on a quest. In the
story, God appears not only as the originator of the quest but also as
Jacob’s opponent. In the overall structure of the Christ story, God is not
only the sender and, in the son, the subject who brings salvation to the
world, but also the world’s opponent since humankind has to be recon-
ciled to God.
A structuralist interpretation of the book of Psalms has shown that the
psalms can be understood in terms of their deep structures. Practically
all the statements in the psalms cluster around four actants. These are: A
= the protagonist/the psalmist/the just/the community/the king; B =
the opposition/the enemy/enemies/the wicked/the nations; C = God;
and D = others/witnesses/the faithful/the just/the nations. In individual
psalms these four elements assume various roles, generally with A as the
recipient, B as the opponent, C as the helper and sender (although some-
times the opponent), and D as the co-recipient. Various binary opposi-
tions run throughout the psalms in the description of persons, states of
being, and expectations: life/death, joy/sorrow, lament/praise, weeping/
dancing, blessing/curse, and so on. Using such structuralist insights,
particular psalms may be analyzed without recourse to actual life situa-
tions, biographical consideration, or historical contexts. Paradoxically,
references to disorder/evil/sin/anarchy in the psalms and thus to the dis-
ruption of normal equilibrium, along with petitions for resolution and
redemption give the psalms a strong biographical/narrative flavor. It is
our ability to understand and identify, even subconsciously, with these
universal structural components in the psalms which has given them
their widespread and enduring appeal.
Some biblical narratives lend themselves to even greater abstraction
and generalization reflective of mythical structures and symbolism.
Mythical structures are found at an even deeper level of abstraction from
the text than narrative structures. We noted above how structuralists ana-
lyze the narrative structure of the Parable of the Good Samaritan. At a
deeper structure or deeper level of abstraction, the parable reflects myth-
ical or paradigmatic structures. The story can be seen as reflecting polar
opposites: life/order/health/kingdom of God-death/disorder/wounded-
nessikingdom  of Satan. At the surface level, the Samaritan as a religious
outcast would have fit into the camp of the disordered, and the Levite
and priest in the arena of the ordered; but well-being in the story is pro-
duced by the Samaritan. The reader is thus challenged to venture outside
the established order and the ordinary religious boundaries and become,
like the Samaritan, a “truly religious person.” Thus in the story Jesus
Structuralist Criticism 119
challenges the normal mythical pattern by making the antihero into the
hero. (One should note the parallels between such structuralist interpre-
tations and medieval allegorical readings: see pp. 20-2 1.)
The examples we have cited are brief and of only limited value in
illustrating the various principles of stmcturalist criticism. Rather than
serving as detailed examples of structuralist exegesis, they are intended
to illustrate the general approach. In experimenting with structural exe-
gesis, we need to resist asking historical questions such as who, when,
where, and how and instead look for general structures in the text, for
examples of binary opposition, and for deep structures reflective of uni-
versal interests and concerns.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
General
Barthes, R., Writing Degree Zero and Elements of Semiology (London/Boston:
Jonathan Cape/Beacon Press, 1967/1970).
Calloud, J., Structural Analysis of Narrative (Philadelphia/Missoula: Fortress
Press/Scholars Press, 1976).
Calloud, J., “A Few Comments on Structural Semiotics: A Brief Explanation of
a Method and Some Explanation of Procedures ” in Semeia 15 (1979) 5 1-83.
Culler, J. D., Structural Poetics: Structuralism, Linguistics and the Story of
Literature (Ithaca, NY/London: Cornell University Press/Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1975), especially pp. 2-54.
Culler, J. D., The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction
(London/Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981).
DeGeorge, R. T. and F. M. DeGeorge  (eds.), The Structuralists:  From Marx to
Levi-Strauss (Garden City/London: Doubleday & Co., 1972).
Detweiler, R., Story, Sign, and Se& Phenomenology and Structuralism as Lit-
erary Critical Methods (Philadelphia/Missoula:  Fortress Press/Scholars Press,
1978).
Greimas, A. J., Semiotics and Language (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1982).
Kermode, F., The Genesis of Secrecy: On the Interpretation of Narrative (Cam-
bridge/London: Harvard University Press, 1979).
Kovacs, B., “Philosophical Foundations for Structuralism ” in Semeia 10
(1978) 85-105.
*Lane, M. (ed.), Introduction to StructuralismlStructuralism:  A Reader (New
York/London: Basic Books/Jonathan Cape, 1970).
Leach, E. R., Claude Levi-Strauss (rev. ed.; New York/London: Viking Press/
Fontana Press, 1974).
*Propp, V., Morphology of the Folktale (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1968; first published 1928).
Ricoeur, P., The Confirict  of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics (Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1974),  especially pp. 27-96.

--- Page 61 ---
120 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbocok
Ricoeur, P., Essays on Biblical InterpretationIOn Biblical Interpn-etation  (Phila-
delphia/London: Fortress Press/SPCK, 1980/1981).
*Robey, D. (ed.), Structuralism: An Introduction (London/Newr  York: Oxford
University Press, 1973).
Scholes, R., Structuralism in Literature: An Introduction (New Haven/London:
Yale University Press, 1974).
Biblical Structuralism
Barthes, R. et al., Structural Analysis and Biblical Exegesis: Interpretational
Essays (Pittsburgh/Edinburgh: Pickwick  Press/T. & T. Clark, l974).
*Barton, J., Reading the Old Testament: Method in Biblical Study’  (London/Phil-
adelphia: Darton,  Longman and Todd/Westminster Press, 1984) 104-39.
Bovon, F. et al., Structural Analysis and Biblical Exegesis: Interpretational
Essays (Pittsburgh: Pickwick  Press, 1974).
Doty, W., “Linguistics and Biblical Criticism” in Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 41 (1973) 114-21.
Greenwood, D. C., Structuralism and the Biblical Text (New York: Mouton de
Gruyter, 1985).
Jacobson, R., “The Structuralists and the Bible ” in Znterpretation
28(1974)146-64.
*Keegan, T. J., Interpreting the Bible: A Popular Introduction to Biblical Her-
meneutics (Mahwah: Paulist Press, 1985) 40-72.
Patte, D., What Is Structural Exegesis? (Philadephia/London: Fortress Press/
SCM Press, 1976).
Polzin, R. M., Biblical Structuralism: Method and Subjectivity t?t the Study of
Ancient Texts (Philadelphia/Missoula:  Fortress Press/Scholars Press, 1977).
Robbins, V. K., “Structuralism in Biblical Interpretation and Tlneology ” The
Thomist 42 ( 1978) 349-72.
*Rogerson, J. W., “Recent Literary Structuralist Approaches to Biblical Inter-
pretation” in The Churchman 90 (1976) 165-77.
Tollers, V. L. and J. R. Maier, The Bible in Its Literary Milieu (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1979).
Old Testament
Alonso-Schokel,  L., “The Poetic Structure of Psalms 4244 ” in Journalfor
theStudy ofthe Old Testament 1 (1976) 4-11; 3 (1977) 61-65.
Bar-Efrat, S., “Some Observations on the Analysis of Structure in Biblical Nar-
rative ” in Vetus Testamentum 30 (1980) 154-73.
Buss, M. (ed.), Encounter with the Text: Form and History in the Hebrew Bible
(Missoula/Philadelphia:  Scholars Press/Fortress Press, 1979).
*Collins, T., “Decoding the Psalms: A Structural Approach to the Psalter ” in
Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 37 (1987) 41-60.
Culley, R. C. (ed.), Classical Hebrew Narrative (Semeia 3; Missoula: Scholars
Press, 1975).
Culley, R. C. (ed.), Perspectives on Old Testament Narrative (Semeia 15; Mis-
soula: Scholars Press, 1979).
Fokkelman, J. P., Narrative Art in Genesis: Specimens of Stylistic and Struc-
tural Analysis (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1975).
Structuralist Criticism 121
Fokkelman, J. P., Narrative Art and Poetry in the Books of Samuel: A Full Inter-
pretation Based on Stylistic and Structural Analyses (4 ~01s.; Assen: Van
Gorcum, 1980-).
Jobling, D., The Sense of Biblical Narrative: Three Structural Analyses in the
Old Testament (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1978).
Leach, E. R., Genesis as Myth and Other Essays (London: Jonathan Cape,
1969).
Leach, E. R. and D. A. Aycock, Structuralist Interpretations of Biblical Myth
(Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Patte, D. (ed.), Genesis2 and 3: Kaleidoscopic Structural Readings (Semeia 18;
Chico: Scholars Press, 1980).
Roth, W., “Structural Interpretations of ‘Jacob at the Jabbok’ (Genesis 32:22-
32) ” in Biblical Research 22 (1977) 51-62.
New Testament
Calloud,  J., “Toward a Structural Analysis of the Gospel of Mark” in Semeia
16 (1980) 133-65.
Crespy, G., “The Parable of the Good Samaritan: An Essay in Structural
Research ” in Semeia 2 (1974) 27-50.
*Crossan, J. D., “Structural Analysis and the Parables of Jesus ” in Linguistica
Biblica 29/30  (1973) 41-5 1.
Kodjak, A., A Structural Analysis of the Sermon on the Mount (New York:
Mouton de Gruyter, 1987).
Patte, D. (ed.), Semiology and Parables: An Exploration of the Possibilities
Offered by Structuralism for Exegesis (Pittsburgh: Pickwick Press, 1975).
Patte, D. and A. Patte, Structural Exegesis: From Theory to Practice. Exegesis
of Mark 15 and 16. Hermeneutical Implications (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1978).
Patte, D., Paul’s Faith and the Power of the Gospel: A Structural Introduction
to the Pauline Letters (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1983).
Via, D., Kerygma and Comedy in the New Testament: A Structuralist Approach
to Hermeneutic (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975).
Via, D., “Parable and Example Story: A Literary-Structuralist Approach ” in
Linguistica Biblica 25126  (1973) 21-30.

--- Page 62 ---
CHAPTER 10 Canonical Criticism 123
CANONICAL
CRITICISM:The Sacred Text of
Synagogue and Church
The Bible is the sacred Scripture of synagogue and church. This
means that the writings comprising the Jewish and Christian Scriptures
are endowed with a special authority and are granted a special role by
these believing communities. Earlier in the book, we noted some factors
involved both in treating a text as sacred and in the interaction between
sacred texts and religious communities (see pp. 13-14, 17-18). At this
point we need to note some of these issues in more detail.
The sacred texts-the canon--of a religious community are what may
be called foundational documents in that they are constitutive and regu-
latory for the life and faith of the community. This status of canonical
texts is based on the belief that they reflect and bear testimony to truth in
a unique and unrepeatable manner. The belief about the texts’ relation-
ship to truth is usually undergirded by claims about their origination
through special inspiration and about their character as revelatory docu-
ments. As foundational texts, they are understood as embodying and
reflecting, in at least embryonic fashion, the essence of the faith and
practice of the community.
This privileged status ascribed to canonical texts means that they are
read and understood in the believing communities in a manner different
from all other texts. The believing communities function as interpreta-
tive communities that read the Scriptures using given conventions and
strategies. First, the text is read with expectations that differ from those
brought to any other text. The believing community reads and listens to
the Bible assuming its relevance and expecting to hear through its words
a witness to, if not the voice of, God. Through the Scriptures, believers
anticipate an existential encounter with truth. Second, the universe of
the sacred text, or to use structuralist terminology, the semantic universe
of the text, challenges the reader and hearer to share its world and con-
victions.  A canonical text thus confronts the audience with an autocratic
claim to faith acceptance; it authoritatively imposes itself. Third, canon-
ical texts are read with a degree of receptivity rarely extended to other
texts. When the believer and believing community read the Scriptures,
they do so as “believers.”
This means they already accept the faith pre-
sented and presumed by the text and thus hear the sacred text in light of
the prior faith. The text is thus approached with a “preunderstanding.”
The text is heard within the context of the faith. A secondary conse-
quence of this preunderstanding and contextual hearing is the tendency
to ignore or indulge differences, inconsistencies, and problems within
the text. The reader fills out and smooths over differences and difficul-
ties within the text in light of the overall cohesion of the canon and in
terms of the community’s faith perspective.
In recent years, there has been a vigorous call to read and exegete bib-
lical texts explicitly as canonical Scripture. Different terminology has
been used to designate this type of exegesis: canonical/canon criticism,
canonical hermeneutics, canonical exegesis, canonical interpretation,
and so forth. Several considerations related to canonical interpretation
should be noted.
(1) The canonical approach is synchronic and thus text-reader oriented.
In this regard, canonical reading of texts has many parallels to redaction
criticism and structuralist interpretations. The text to be exegeted is the
final form, namely, the form of the text that achieved canonical status.
The reader is understood specifically as a reader standing within the
believing community for whom the text is canonical. This means that the
interpreter is not concerned with the issues characteristic of historical-crit-
ical approaches-theearliest  or pre-canonical form of the text or tradition,
the original intention of the.writer, events and experiences behind the text,
or the historical/sociological/psychological context that gave birth to the
text, These may be given some consideration but are not the decisive fac-
tors for reading and understanding the text. (Already in his Confessions,
Augustine wrestled with the issue of the “truth of things” vs. the “inten-
tion of the speaker [Moses],” preferring the former since it was difficult to
know whether “Moses meant this [interpretation] and wished this to be
understood from his account” [Book 12. Chapters 23-241.  Thus the ten-
sion between a canonical reading and the original author’s intent was
already an issue for Augustine.)
(2) A canonical reading of a text will vary depending upon which
believing community is doing the reading and which canon is being
read. Jewish, Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant scriptural canons dif-

--- Page 63 ---
124 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
fer considerably from one another. Simultaneously, the faith perspective
within which canonical texts are read also varies considerably, not only
among the major religious groups themselves, but also among various
denominations within the same religious tradition. Even the content of
books such as Esther and Daniel differs from one canon to another.
Obviously, Christians read the Old Testament with different expecta-
tions and different theological preunderstanding than Jewish readers. In
other words, the symbolic worlds and the reading conventions of Jews
and Christians differ appreciably.
Even the canonical ordering of the books in the Jewish Bible and the
Christian Old Testament illustrates a major difference in approach and
preunderstanding. The books in the Jewish Bible are ordered into three
divisions-Torah, Prophets, and Writings. Priority is given to the
Torah. The medieval Jewish philosopher Maimonides (1135-1204)
describes these divisions as three concentric circles with the Torah in the
center and the other two divisions as illustrative commentary arranged in
descending order of authority. This structure and its underlying assump-
tions indicate that the books in the second and third divisions are to be
read looking backward-the Prophets and the Writings are read in the
shadow of the Torah. The Christian canon, on the other hand, is struc-
tured into the four following divisions-Torah, History, Poetry, and
Prophets. Placing the prophets with their predictions last encouraged the
Christian to look beyond the Old Testament and to read the preceding
material with a forward-looking rather than a backward-looking
orientation.
(3) Canonization separated the meaning of the texts from dependence
on their historical or original use. Texts that once grew out of and were
rooted in particular historical contexts and communities have been
detached from such contexts and made accessible to a wider and univer-
sal audience. In canonizing the literature, the believing communities
declared the writings to be universally and permanently relevant and
accessible. The canonical process loosened the texts from specific his-
torical settings and transcended the original addresses. Synagogue and
church declared that the historically conditioned and original meaning of
the Scriptures was not their only nor their most important meaning. Pro-
phetic preaching, for example, was originally addressed to specific his-
torical and rhetorical situations; because the situation was known,
explanatory details were not required. When such material became part
of a later literary document and the memory of the rhetorical situation
had faded, then the content of such speeches assumed a more genera-
Canonical Criticism
lized cast. Isaiah’s speeches in 1:2-20 and 2622, for example, \vere
probably originally delivered in light of the recent devastating earth-
quake under Uzziah (Amos 1:2; Zech. 145). The material itself, how-
ever, provides no clues that unequivocally point to, and none that
demand, such a setting. Thus these two speeches, now severed from
their original setting, lend themselves to interpretation in general and/or
futuristic categories. It was not just the canonical process per se that
dehistoricized and generalized the material; the nature and content of the
speeches and the editorial process had early on already given such mate-
rial this open-ended, unhistorically conditioned quality. Now in their
canonical form, the reader encounters the material without specific his-
torical associations.
125
An example of the deinstitutionalization  with the resultant generaliza-
tion of material can be seen in the case of the psalms. Most if not all of
the psalms were originally composed for and utilized in services of wor-
ship. The editorial and canonical process which shaped the Psalter pro-
duced a book of compositions whose original association with Israel’s
worship is almost totally obscured.
(4) A canonical approach avoids the atomization and thus the isolated
interpretation of texts. A text is to be read as part of the Bible in its
entirety, not as an independent, single unit. Each passage is read as part
of a biblical book, and the biblical book is seen as part of an even larger
entity-the canon as a whole. The whole is thus greater and more
authoritative than any of its parts. Thus even a biblical book has only
penultimate authority since it is the Bible as a whole that possesses final
canonical authority. (It can be argued that even the canon has only rela-
tive authority since the Bible is read in the context of a believing, inter-
pretive community whose faith and beliefs provide the lens for
interpreting the Scriptures. The faith of the community places contraints
on the possible meanings just as the faith of the community established
the limits of the canon initially.) The believing community reads and
hears the Scriptures, assuming the canon’s internal cohesion. Thus, even
a passage from the Old Testament read in the church will be heard in
light of the New Testament. Texts are read and heard in interaction and
concert. The mutual interplay among texts, which results produced an
accumulative effort, transcends any one text. This does not mean that
the believing community should or does suppress the plurality and fluid-
ity in the biblical writings. (The church, for example, consistently
opposed any move to reduce the number of the Gospels or to replace the
four with a single harmonization.) The assumption is, however, that the

--- Page 64 ---
126 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
understanding and interpretation of an individual text must conform to
the constraints resulting from the text’s existence as part of a larger
work.
(5) Canonical criticism is overtly theological in its approach. In terms
of our diagrams on pages 24-25, a canonical approach interprets the
Bible as a mimetic reflection of reality, as a vehicle for understanding
the will of God. The Bible is Scripture and must be so interpreted. If
historical-critical studies ask what the individual units and books in the
Bible originally meant, canonical criticism is concerned with the mean-
ing of the text for the canonizing community and with the present mean-
ing of the text.
Some examples can illustrate the character and method of a canonical
reading and interpretation of biblical texts. The book of Isaiah provides
one of the clearest illustrations of the impact of canonical reading. His-
torical criticism has demonstrated with a reasonable degree of certainty
that large portions of Isaiah, at least chapters 40-55, come from the
sixth century. Second Isaiah, as this material is designated, has been
attached to and become a part of a collection attributed to Isaiah who
functioned during the eighth-century reigns of Kings Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah (see Isa. 1:l). (Third Isaiah, chapters 56-66,
about which there is less certainty, has undergone a similar fate.) Thus,
in the editorial process leading to the book’s canonical shape and con-
tent, chapters 40-55 were loosed from any explicit association with the
events of the sixth century. (References to Cyrus, as in Isa. 45: 1, do not
absolutely demand reading chapters 40-55 with reference to the sixth
century.) Simultaneously, they were “rehistoricized” and associated
with the prophet Isaiah and the eighth century. This shift had the effect
of intensifying the futuristic cast of the material and the redemptive char-
acter of its content. Likewise it strengthened an understanding of Isaiah
and his prophetic preaching in terms of the prediction of future events:
By the spirit of might he [Isaiah] saw the last things,
and comforted those who mourned in Zion.
He revealed what was to occur to the end of time,
and the hidden things before they came to pass.
(Sirach 48:24-25)
As we noted earlier in this chapter (see section 3), in the editorial pro-
cess, historically specific oracles of Isaiah assumed a generalized tone.
Isaiah 9:2-7 and 11: l-9 once spoke about a particular contemporary
ruler on the throne of David (in this case probably King Ahaz). In their
Canonical Criticism 127
more dehistoricized general form, such passages lent themselves to and,
in fact, practically required an idealistic and messianic interpretation. In
their edited canonical form, the prophet did not appear to be speaking
while looking around at his contemporaries; he appeared to be looking
forward to one who would come. As part of a Christian canon these Isa-
ianic texts defy a reading which does not simultaneously resonate in
some fashion with the early church’s claims about Jesus.
A canonical exegesis must take into consideration not only the final
form of the text but also the final form of the text as part of canonical
Scripture. There are no First, Second, and Third Isaiahs in Scripture,
only the book of Isaiah. Certainly the Christian community could hardly
think of Yahweh’s chosen leader in Isaiah, solely in terms of Isaiah 9:2-
7 and 1 l:l-9, and without regard for such texts as Isaiah 52: 13-53: 12.
Historical-critical considerations might argue that the two sets of texts
derive from different contexts and originally referred to different figures
(although this might be questioned even on historical-critical grounds).
Their presence now within one book encourages association in
interpretation.
A text from the book of Ecclesiastes could be treated differently
depending on whether one is working from historical-critical or canoni-
cal perspectives. A strong and reasonable case can be built for Ecclesias-
tes 12:13-14  being a late editorial addition to the book. Throughout
much of the remainder of the book a rather skeptical and pessimistic
view is taken of life and religion. Historical critics assume that the origi-
nal book was completely skeptical in outlook. The later addition, how-
ever, suggests to the reader that one should not give in to doubt and
unbelief, that is, it relativizes the preceding skeptical advice. The final
form of the canonical text has overridden the skepticism of an earlier
form. Obviously a canonical reading must take 12: 13-14 into considera-
tion in exegeting other texts in the book. The pessimistic thrust of the
book is thus mitigated by the optimistic conclusion.
The content of one book may also relativize the content of another.
Throughout the book of Ecclesiastes, no hope is held out for believing in
immortality or the resurrection of the dead. In fact Ecclesiastes 3:19
declares that humans suffer the same fate as animals; both die without
hope. If this text is interpreted within a canon that contains the Wisdom
of Solomon (as in Orthodox and Catholic circles), then the assertion of
the Ecclesiastes text is highly relativized, since Wisdom 3:1-9 clearly
affirms immortality and rewards after death. When Ecclesiastes 
3:19  is
read as part of a canon containing the New Testament with its strong and

--- Page 65 ---
128 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Canonical Criticism 129
pervasive emphasis on the resurrection, the content of the Ecclesiastes
text is even further relativized.
So far, we have illustrated canonical criticism primarily with refer-
ence to the Old Testament. The approach has similar implications for
New Testament interpretation. Canonical interpretation emphasizes that
the New Testament should be interpreted in terms of its final canonical
form. Several general inferences drawn from such a conclusion differ
radically from typical historical-critical perspectives.
(1) Reconstructed settings in the life of Jesus should not be given pri-
ority in interpreting the sayings or teachings of Jesus. Much modern
interpretation of the teachings of Jesus relies on the assumption that
these teachings must be freed from their present literary contexts and
projected back into the socio-politico-religious circumstances of the his-
torical Jesus in order to be understood properly. A canonical interpreta-
tion would conclude that such hypothetical reconstructions are of benefit
only if they contribute to an understanding of the present form and con-
strual of the text.
(2) Pre-canonical literary compositions may not be appealed to as the
key for understanding canonical compositions. For example, the recon-
structed document “Q,” which was apparently used by the authors of
Matthew and Luke, may aid in understanding how traditions and sayings
were once formulated and transmitted but cannot be assigned any deter-
minative authoritative status in interpreting the final canonical form of
the biblical materials. Similarly, although the Gospel of Luke and the
book of Acts were apparently originally a single composition, they were
canonized as two separate works and in the final analysis must be so
interpreted.
(3) The chronological order in which biblical books originated is not
decisive for exegesis. Modern scholarship tends to assume, for example,
that 1 Thessalonians was the first written of Paul’s epistles. In the canon,
however, Romans opens the collection of Pauline writings. In establish-
ing this order, the early church predisposed the reader to interpret the
remainder of Paul’s writings in light of the book of Romans. The canoni-
cal construal of the material thus severed the letters of Paul from their
chronological moorings. A canonical reading thus differs from one
based on chronological considerations.
In carrying out a canonical interpretation of a passage, the interpreter
focuses not on the original authorial intention or the circumstances of the
original situation but on how the text in its present form and construal
bears the theological witness to faith and the gospel.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Development of the Biblical Canons
Aland, K., The Problem of the New Testament Canon (Oxford/Westminster,
MD: A. R. Mowbray & CoKanterbury Press, 1962).
Attridge, H. W. (ed.), The Formation of the New Testament Canon (New York:
Paulist Press, 1983).
Barton, J., Oracles of God: Perceptions of Ancient Prophecy in Israel after the
Exile (London: Dar-ton, Longman  and Todd, 1986).
Beckwith, R., The Old Testament Canon of the New Testament Church and Its
Background in Early Judaism (London/Grand Rapids: SPCKEerdmans Pub-
lishing Company, 1985).
Best, E., “Scripture, Tradition and the Canon of the New Testament ” in BuZZe-
tin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester 61 (1979) 259-89.
Bruns, G. L., “Canon and Power in the Hebrew Sciptures ” in Critical Inquiry
10 (1984) 462-80.
*von Campenhausen, H., The Formation of the Christian Bible (Philadelphia:
Fortress Press, 1972).
Detweiler, R., “What is a Sacred Text?” in Semeia 31 (1985) 213-30.
Dunn, J. D. G., “Levels of Canonical Authority” in Horizons in Biblical Theol-
ogy 4 (1982) 13-60.
Farmer, W. R. and D. M. Farkasfalvy, The Formation of the New Testament
Canon: An Ecumenical Approach (New York: Paulist Press, 1983).
Gamble, H. Y., The New Testament Canon: Its Making and Meaning (Philadel-
phia: Fortress Press, 1985).
Leiman, S. Z. (ed.), The Canon andMasorah  of the Hebrew Bible: An Introduc-
tory Reader (New York: KTAV, 1974).
Leiman, S. Z., The Canonization of Hebrew Scripture: The Talmudic and Mid-
rashic Evidence (Hamden, CT: Archon  Books, 1976).
Lewis, J. P., “What Do We Mean by Jabneh?” in Journal of Bible and Religion
32 (1964) 125-32.
Lightstone, J. N., “The Formation of the Biblical Canon in Judaism of Late
Antiquity: Prolegomena to a General Reassessment ” in Studies in Religion 8
(1979) 135-42.
McDonald, L. M., The Formation of the Christian Biblical Canon (Nashville:
Abingdon Press, 1988).
*Sundberg, A. C., Jr., The Old Testament of the Early Church (Cambridge/
London: Harvard University Press, 1964).
Sundberg, A. C., Jr., “The Protestant Old Testament Canon: Should It be Re-
examined?” in Catholic Biblical Quarterly 28 (1966) 194-203.
Sundberg, A. C., Jr., “The ‘Old Testament’: A Christian Canon ” in Catholic
Biblical Quarterly 30 (1968) 143-55.
Canonical Criticism
Ackroyd, P. A., “Original Text and Canonical Text ” in Union Seminary Quar-
terly Review 32 (1977) 166-73.

--- Page 66 ---
130 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
*Barr, J., Holy Scripture: Canon, Authority, Criticism (London/Philadelphia:
Oxford University Press/Westminster Press, 1983).
*Barton, J., Reading the Old Testament: Method in Biblical Study (London/Phil-
adelphia: Darton, Longman and Todd/Westminster Press, 1984) 77-103,
140-57.
Brown, R. E., The Critical Meaning of the Bible (New York: Paulist Press,
1981).
Brueggemann, W., The Creative Word: Canon as a Model for Biblical Educa-
tion (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
Childs, B. S., “The Old Testament as Scripture of the Church ” in Concordia
Theological Monthly 43 (1972) 709-22.
Childs, B. S., “The Exegetical Significance of Canon for the Study of the Old
Testament ” in Supplements to Vetus Testamentum (vol. 29; Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1978) 66-80.
*Childs, B. S., Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture (LondonlPhila-
delphia:  SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1979).
*Childs,  B. S., The New Testament as Canon: An Introduction (London/Phila-
delphia: SCM Press/Fortress Press, 1985).
Coats, G. W. and B. 0. Long (eds.), Canon andAuthority:  Essays In Old Testa-
ment Religion and Theology (Philadelphia; Fortress Press, 1977).
Fowl, S., “The Canonical Approach of Brevard Childs ” in Expository Times
96 (1985) 173-75.
Keegan, T. J., Interpreting the Bible: A Popular Introduction to Biblical Herme-
neutics (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1985) 131-64.
Lemcio, E., “The Gospels and Canonical Criticism ” in Biblical Theology Bul-
letin 11 (1981) 114-22.
Roth, W., Isaiah (Knox Preaching Guides; Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1987).
Sanders, J. A., Torah and Canon (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1974).
Sanders, J. A., Canon and Community: A Guide to Canonical Criticism (Phila-
delphia: Fortress Press, 1984).
*Sanders, J. A., From Sacred Story to Sacred Text (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1987).
Sheppard, G. T., “Canonization: Hearing the Voice of the Same God Through
Historically Dissimilar Traditions ” in Interpretation 37 (1982) 21-33.
Siker, J., “The Theology of the Sabbath in the Old Testament: A Canonical
Approach ” in Studia Biblicu et Theologica 11 (198 1) 5-20.
Spina,  F. A., “Canonical Criticism: Childs Versus Sanders ” in Interpreting
God’s Word for Today: An Inquiry into Hermeneutics from a Biblical Theo-
logical Perspective (ed. W. McCown and J. E. Massey; Anderson, IN:
Warner Press, 1982) 165-94.
Steinmetz, D. C., “The Superiority of Pre-Critical Exegesis ” in Theology
Toduy  37 ( 1980) 27-38.
Stuhlmacher, P., Historic& Criticism and Theological Interpretation of Scrip-
ture (Philadephia: Fortress Press, 1977).
CHAPTER 11
Integrating
EXEGETICAL
PROCEDURES
The goal of exegesis is an informed understanding of a text. All the
exegetical procedures and types of criticism which we have discussed in
the preceding chapters have this as their aim.
At this point, the student may feel a bit overwhelmed by the diversity
of critical aproaches which can be utilized in exegeting a biblical text
and somewhat submerged in a mass of what appear to be prescriptive
directions. Here one may wish to ask, “Is all of this necessary merely to
understand a text?” “ How is it possible to use and integrate all of these
procedures?” Before discussing some of the more practical aspects of
exegesis, several suggestions perhaps should be made at this juncture.
(1) The task of biblical exegesis is not unrelated to much of the work
that is done in general theological education. In fact, many courses
which involve the reading and analysis of sources, whether primary or
secondary, present occasions for doing forms of exegesis. Whenever
one encounters a text and asks such questions as, “How should I read
this text?” “What does this mean?” “Why is this said this way?”
“Why does the text say this and not something else?” “How can I
rethink what is said so as to give it expression in my own words?” one is
engaged in exegesis. Thus exegesis, even of technical works, is not an
activity strange to theological students. We should recognize much of
our work as exegetical in orientation and be conscious that much that is
learned from the interrogation of a text in a non-biblical area has rele-
vance for and can be carried over to the interrogation of a biblical text.
(2) Practically all biblical studies, even if they are not designated as
“exegetical,” are relevant to the task of exegesis. Introductory and
other courses on the Bible explore facets of the nature and content of bib-
lical documents, the history and religion of Israel and the early church,
and the culture and background of biblical texts. Many of these topics

--- Page 67 ---
132 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Integrating Exegetical Procedures 133
already contribute to an understanding of many of the procedures of exe-
gesis as well as provide data and insights needed in exegetical work.
Thus general biblical studies either engage in exegesis or provide sub-
stance and evidence that can be employed in exegesis.
(3) Not all the exegetical procedures we have discussed are relevant to
every text. Frequently, for example, no significant textual problems will
be encountered. Although there are thousands of variations among the
Greek texts of the New Testament, most of these textual variants are not
of any great consequence for interpreting a passage. With practically all
texts, some forms of criticism will be of more significance than others
but seldom will all be of crucial importance.
(4) Exegetical procedures are frequently carried out and critical meth-
ods utilized although the exegete may not be consciously aware of doing
“grammatical analysis” or some other such activity. Most exegetical
methods are based on the operation of common sense, intuition, and
good judgment. Whenever a text is studied with these factors in opera-
tion, many of the technical forms of criticism are already being utilized.
Although the terminology used for such criticisms and the conscious for-
mulation of such methods are of rather recent vintage, good exegetes
throughout the centuries have been concerned with the issues which the
methodologies articulate. The same condition can certainly be equally
characteristic of the contemporary situation.
In “doing exegesis,” the student should realize that, as we suggested
earlier, the various exegetical procedures are not related to one another
in any strict architectonic fashion. That is, no mechanical system of
steps or stages in the exegetical process can be set up and rigidly fol-
lowed. One cannot, let us say, first do the textual-critical analysis, and
then proceed to a second step and so on. Frequently, the interests and
issues of the various criticisms are interrelated. Textual-critical conclu-
sions, for example, may depend upon what conclusions have been
reached from form-critical considerations. A particular textual variant
may appear more original than another because it fits better the form of
the material. Textual-critical conclusions could certainly be influenced
by grammatical analysis.
An appropriate way of proceeding in doing an exegesis of a passage is
to let the questions and issues arise from the text itself. This is often best
achieved by reading and rereading the passage in its context several
times. As the exegete rereads the passage, questions of various kinds
will naturally present themselves to the reader. If the same questions or
the same types of questions keep surfacing as the exegete rereads the
passage, they should be listed and classified into appropriate categories.
If, for example, certain words or phrases continue to remain obscure,
and they do not “fall into place” in subsequent readings, they provide
part of the exegete’s agenda and may involve some word study. Or, if all
the words and phrases themselves are clear, but they still continue to
puzzle the reader, one may discover that the syntax of the sentence or
paragraph needs to be untangled, and this will provide a different sort of
agenda and move into grammatical analysis. It may be that on a first or
second reading of the passage, the exegete notices a significant variation
of wording referred to in a footnote, so significant that it might substan-
tially alter one’s final interpretation of the passage. In this case, the tex-
tual-critical problem sets the agenda.
To put it another way, the text itself should set the interpretive agenda
whenever possible. This in no way suggests that the interpreter can bring
to the text amind which is a “blank tablet” for this is clearly impossible.
In fact, every time we read a text, we bring to the text the total accumula-
tion of who we are-our previous history, our previously accumulated
knowledge, our outlook, our individual concerns, and our preunder-
standing of what the text or passage means. It has been said that a literary
work is like a picnic-the author brings the words and the reader brings
the meaning. Although clearly an exaggeration, the saying nonetheless
is partially true. Rather than denying that each interpreter reads texts
with preunderstanding and many presuppositions, we should recognize
that this is inherent in any kind of interpretation. Rather than denying it,
we should rather recognize it, and capitalize on it. This is best achieved
by admitting our presuppositions, trying as best we can to recognize
what they are, how we came to hold them, and then allow for them as we
interpret a passage. We should not simply read our own interpretation
into a passage; that is eisegesis not exegesis. We should rather read a
passage through our understanding which we bring to the text. This
understanding can be broadened, modified, or deepened as we exegete
the text.
Even if we bring our previous understanding to a text as we begin to
interpret it, the text still possesses an autonomy which we should
respect. The interpreter should allow the text to speak for itself. By this
we mean that the text possesses its own voice, and at this stage the inter-
preter should learn to listen. Far too frequently, the interpreter is too
eager to speak to the text, or even into the text, rather than listen atten-
tively to it. When this occurs, the interpreter succeeds in hearing his or
her own voice, not the voice of the text. By granting some autonomy to

--- Page 68 ---
134 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
the text, and allowing it to speak its own message, the interpreter will
discover that the text can not only set its own agenda, but a full one at
that. As questions begin to surface, the exegete’s task begins to take
shape. The exegete’s art consists in the ability to appreciate the nature
and genre of the text at hand and what questions are appropriate to
address to that particular type of text and to sort out the genuinely impor-
tant questions, knowing which exegetical techniques and criticisms are
most appropriate for addressing these questions, knowing which tools
and books are most suitable for applying these techniques, and knowing
how to deploy them efficiently and imaginatively so as to produce an
informed and coherent interpretation of a text.
By insisting that the text possesses its own autonomy and by urging
the interpreter to listen first and speak later, we do not wish to eliminate
the possibility of coming to a text with a previously defined agenda.
Quite often as one is engaged in a particular type of research, for exam-
ple, an investigation in which one is trying to reconstruct the history of a
particular period, it will become obvious that a biblical text, or a set of
texts, provides the most useful set of sources for doing so. In this case,
one may quite legitimately approach the biblical text with previously
formulated questions, namely, “What historical information does it pro-
vide about the period under consideration?” Or, “How does it illumi-
nate or illustrate the historical period?” The interpreter, thus, may come
to a text, knowing in advance that certain kinds of questions and these
questions only, will be asked of a text. The interpreter’s task in this situ-
ation is being able to recognize, first, whether after reading the texts,
this is a legitimate question or type of approach and, second, whether
other kinds of questions may be asked of the text, perhaps with as much
justification, and perhaps to greater benefit.
The beginning exegete, then, should bring all previous understanding
to bear on a particular text, define as clearly as possible the kinds of
questions one is asking of the text and that the text requires asking, and
then determine which techniques and modes of criticism are most appro-
priate in addressing these questions.
Exegesis, as conceived and described in this volume, occurs when a
person reads a biblical text and, based on an informed understanding of
this text, develops a first-hand interpretation of the text. Throughout our
discussion, it has been assumed that the primary encounter will occur
between the reader and the biblical text itself and that all other investiga-
tions will be carried out toward this end. Consequently, we have empha-
sized the use of primary tools, such as dictionaries, concordances, and
Integrating Exegetical Procedures 135
encyclopedias, and other aids to inform the exegete’s own formulation
of the questions to be answered and the interpretation to be achieved.
This approach has been followed consciously because beginning exe-
getes often misconceive the nature and task of exegesis. Exegesis does
not consist in consulting various commentaries on a given passage and
from these commentaries constructing a single interpretation unifying
the various observations and remarks of the commentators. Approaching
exegesis in this fashion only produces a mosaic of commentaries, and
ultimately means that the interpreter only directly engages the commen-
taries themselves, while the text is encountered only indirectly, if at all.
When this approach is taken to exegesis, it is like an artist who paints a
picture by cutting up other artists’ pictures and pasting them together. To
develop an understanding of a text through the exclusive use of com-
mentaries on the passage can only produce a derivative interpretation
because the questions asked by the commentators remain central and pri-
mary. Granting such dominance to biblical commentators also produces
a kind of exegetical tyranny where the beginning interpreter assumes
that the commentators’ questions are not only the right questions to be
asked of a text, but also the important ones, or even the only ones.
Rather than conceiving exegesis as the process through which the
interpreter constructs a sort of collage of commentators’ opinions, exe-
gesis should be a more direct engagement between interpreter and text.
By stressing the first-hand quality of the interpretive process, we want to
underscore the autonomy of the interpreter. It is important for the begin-
ning exegete to realize that the questions of a novice, even if they later
turn out to be the wrong or ill-formulated questions, are nevertheless the
questions a novice must ask. Only by asking the questions a text truly
poses for the beginner will it be possible to develop skill in learning to
interrogate a text. The beginning exegete should not be intimidated by
the erudition of biblical commentaries and scholars, and in doing so
allow them to set the agenda. Much is gained by reading a text for one-
self, learning to formulate one’s own questions and issues based on a
careful reading of the text, and doing so with both independence and
imagination.
In calling for this primary level of reading and interpreting the biblical
documents, we are not minimizing the work of biblical commentators
and the scholarly guild, for they render a valuable service to those who
read, study, and interpret texts, both novices and veterans. We merely
want to insist upon the primacy of the interpreter’s task, and encourage
even the beginning exegete to develop both independence and imagina-

--- Page 69 ---
136 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
tion. A better use of commentaries and other books or articles, which
spell out the interpretations of particular books or texts, is as a source for
secondary consultation and orientation rather than as a primary refer-
ence. Commentaries function best to provide a control for the inter-
preter’s own hypotheses and intuitions. They are best viewed as the
work of more experienced interpreters whose opinions and views can be
consulted rather than taken as unquestionably authoritative. For this rea-
son, for the student who wishes to develop some expertise in doing exe-
gesis, they will always function in a secondary role. (Lists of
commentaries on individual books may be found in the standard Old
Testament and New Testament introductions and evaluations of individ-
ual commentaries and commentary series may be found in the standard
biblical bibliographies; see the bibliography to chapter one.)
If exegesis is not merely the compilation of statements and opinions of
various commentators, neither is it a report of one’s research per se.
Beginning exegetes often err in assuming that an exegesis paper consists
in reporting or organizing into some systematic fashion all the research
one has carried out in analyzing a passage. Some of this is done, to be
sure, but exegesis is more than this. Rather than collecting and organiz-
ing all the data one has uncovered, exegesis consists of a coherent inter-
pretation of the passage based upon a careful perusal of the data and an
informed, competent reading. This requires an additional step, where
one deploys rather than reports this information, arranging it into mean-
ingful sections and patterns of argumentation so that the passage itself is
unfolded in an illuminating fashion. Rather than constituting the exege-
sis, one’s research on various facets of the passage provides that from
which the exegesis is prepared. One’s research informs the interpreta-
tion; it does not constitute it.
Quite often, beginning exegetes err by including within an exegesis
paper numerous historical, lexicographical, linguistic, and many other
types of details, without at the same time deploying them into an overall
scheme which succeeds in genuinely illuminating the passage. This pas-
sion for details, though commendable in and of itself, should be coupled
with a passion for coherence and overall clarity. The exegete must ask,
at the end of the exegesis, whether the paper as a whole illuminates or
obfuscates a passage. It may be full of factually correct information yet
fail to illuminate or display an understanding of the passage in any
appreciable fashion.
A third mistake beginning exegetes often make is assuming that the
best way of unfolding the analysis is in a verse-by-verse fashion or in a
Integrating Exegetical Procedures 137
series of word studies. While this is true in some instances, it is not true
in every instance. Some biblical passages lend themselves quite readily
to such an organizational structure while others do not. The most impor-
tant consideration in deciding on the structure of an exegesis is whether
it is sufficiently comprehensive to do justice to all the important aspects
of the passage, yet pliable enough to provide the framework for
unfolding an illuminating and coherent interpretation.
Here again, the text itself must offer the best guidance. Some texts,
because they unfold an argument in sequential, step-by-step fashion or
reflect a particular genre structure, may require an exegetical outline
which both exposes and illuminates this structure. Other texts, by con-
trast, perhaps because they are narrative, are best treated thematically or
in some other fashion. The exegesis may be arranged according to major
themes which emerge from the passage, and under the treatment of these
themes it may be possible for the exegete to treat all the important ques-
tions which arise throughout the passage.
It should be remembered that an exegesis is an informed understand-
ing of a passage based on a first-hand engagement with and a thinking
through of the text. How one’s understanding of the text is actually pre-
sented finally becomes a decision of the exegete, and at this point the
exegete learns fist hand how vitally related form is to content and how
both shape meaning. Once the exegete has developed an understanding
of content and has articulated the meaning of the passage, the remaining
task is to decide upon the appropriate form in which both of these can be
conveyed.
Throughout our discussion of the various techniques of exegesis, we
have introduced the more practical concerns only incidentally as we
have explained the more theoretical nature of each of the types of criti-
cism which might inform an understanding of a passage. At this point,
we now turn to the more explicitly practical concerns of preparing an
exegesis.
(1) Allow the text to set the agenda. We have already stressed the
importance of allowing the questions to arise out of dialogue with the
text itself. As the exegete reads a biblical passage, then rereads it several
times, preferably in the original but in at least more than one translation,
questions and issues of various sorts will begin to emerge. As these
become formulated, the exegete will naturally begin to sift them out and
arrange them in some order of priority, so that all the crucial ones are
addressed.
(2) Let the questions point to the appropriate methodology, exegetical

--- Page 70 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Integrating Exegetical Procedures 139
technique, or type of criticism. At this stage, the exegete will need to
possess a general understanding of the various dimensions of a text and
how they have been or may be approached by the various exegetical
techniques which we have discussed in the earlier chapters of this book.
For example, if it becomes clear that the text contains references to his-
torical persons, places, or events with which the interpreter is unfamil-
iar, the exegete should recognize that such questions belong to the
general category of historical criticism. Accordingly, one should pro-
ceed to the investigation of different issues and problems by consulting
and using the reference books and tools useful for providing such
information.
(3) Utilize the tools appropriate to a given exegetical technique. As
we have noted earlier, some exegetical tools and reference books are
especially useful in unfolding certain dimensions of a text while others
are more appropriate for other dimensions. A critical edition of the Bible
which supplies information for variant wordings may be especially use-
ful for textual-critical questions but only of little value for broader liter-
ary questions. At this point, the exegete is required to know what tools
are available, the types of information each will yield, and how they may
be used in concert with each other. This is best gained by developing
first-hand acquaintance with them.
(4) Correlate the questions and answers addressed to this point. After
the first several readings of a passage, and after several sets of questions
and issues have been isolated and addressed, the exegete gradually dis-
covers how interlocking these are. Quite often, a literary question will
be seen to be related integrally to a historical one, and the answer to both
may ultimately hinge upon the answer to a more theological question. At
this point, the exegete’s task must become more sophisticated as the
attempt is made to correlate various kinds of techniques and types of crit-
icism. In fact, what often emerges is another, entirely new set of ques-
tions or a set of old questions now more refined and sharpened. These
the interpreter addresses in much the same fashion as earlier, always
attentive to the various dimensions of a text and the various kinds of
tools useful to addressing them.
(5) Conclude the analysis. These initial levels of investigation may be
viewed as analysis, in the stricter sense of “breaking down” the exegeti-
cal work into its component parts. Here the exegete’s task is to “break
down” the passage, examine its language, structure, and all its various
components, with a view to seeing them both in isolation and in relation
to each other. Sometimes, pursuing one exegetical procedure will lead to
another, but just as often, one will have to make a concerted effort to
examine each part of the passage and to pursue various exegetical tech-
niques, even if they seem to bear no clear relation to the other parts and
procedures. The goal here is to make sure that one has tackled all those
aspects of a passage which might conceivably be related to producing an
overall interpretation. It often happens that the exegete spends much
time in examining aspects of the passage which turn out, in the end, not
to be very relevant to the final exegesis at all. Unfortunately, this is in
the very nature of research and cannot easily be avoided.
(6) Synthesize the findings into a coherent interpretation of the pas-
sage. This usually turns out to be the most difficult stage of an exegesis,
primarily because it requires selectivity. After the exegete has completed
the forrnal stage of analyzing the passage, it now remains to survey the
field, assess one’s findings, and then decide how they may best be put
together to produce an illuminating interpretation of the passage. This
often means that the material will be presented in the exegesis paper
itself in an order totally out of sequence from that of the investigation.
For example, one might have engaged in historical criticism at the very
end of one’s analysis, and the nature of the text may have required this.
Yet, upon reflection, the exegete may decide that it is precisely this
aspect of the passage which will need to be discussed first in an exegesis
paper. Thus, the order in which the basic exegetical research was carried
out may not necessarily be the order in which the final exegesis is
unfolded.
This stage of synthesis requires the exegete to weigh each part of the
investigation in light of other parts. In the analytical stage, a great
amount of time might have been spent on answering certain questions,
yet, on reflection, the exegete may decide that all of this research may be
telescoped into a very short space.
Conversely, what might have required only a short amount of research
time may actually require several paragraphs of elaboration in the exege-
sis itself. Here, it becomes a question of balance. The exegete must have
developed enough familiarity with the passage to be able to decide
which aspects of the passage need full elaboration and which do not. No
clear-cut answer to this aspect of synthesis can be given in the abstract.
Another important consideration at this stage of preparing an exegesis
is to allow sufficient time for the synthesis to occur. A common mistake
made by beginning students is failing to allow enough time for the infor-
mation gained in the analysis stage to jell. In fact, one of the reasons that
exegesis papers often turn out to be a potpourri of miscellaneous facts

--- Page 71 ---
140 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
and observations is that the analysis stage was hurried and not enough
time was allowed for the interpreter to sift out the less important details
in order to discern those aspects of the passage which truly require illu-
mination and elaboration. This is best remedied, first of all, by establish-
ing a definite point of terminating the analysis stage. The exegete will
soon discover that the analytical stage is, in one sense, interminable, for
there may be literally no limit to how far one can investigate a passage.
Yet, realistically the analytical research must be concluded, and it can
be, as long as one has established appropriate time limitations and pro-
vided one has focused on centrally important questions.
Second, once the exegetical analysis has been concluded, it is quite
often most helpful to let the material set for a while. This will often allow
the exegetical dust to settle long enough to enable the exegete to see the
overall terrain from a better perspective. Moreover, this jelling period
will often allow time for certain parts to fit into a larger scheme, and the
synthesis, in this case, will have already occurred to a large degree
before the final writing of the exegesis paper actually begins. Obviously,
as in every writing project, certain things will not become fully clear
until one begins writing, but much will have become clear, and the more
synthesis one can achieve before the final writing, the better.
CHARTER 12
Employing the Fruits of
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS
The Bible is read, used, and interpreted in many different contexts
and in many different ways in contemporary culture. The manifold ways
in which the Bible is read and studied range from in ‘&al reading for
2general knowledge to college and university li rature courses. In the
former, it may be treated as one of the classical documents about which
the educated person should be informed. In the latter, it may be treated
as any other document from classical antiquity or explored for its literary
and other influences on modem culture.
Within Judaism and Christianity, the Bible, of course, has the status
of sacred text. Within these two religious communities, the Bible, as
Scripture, has been ascribed and plays a normative role. As such, it is
read and employed in special ways, in ways that are different from those
of the general reading public or of the student in a comparative literature
course. Within these communities of faith, the Bible has various
functions.
Both Jews and Christians use the Scriptures to reconstruct the early
history of their communities. Both communities use the Bible as a
resource for understanding and formulating their beliefs and theologies.
Both use the Scriptures within the context of public worship where they
are read and used for preaching and proclamation. Both Jews and Chris-
t&ns utilize the Bible for personal appropriation and for inskht and
&ance in multiple aspects of life.
Emisjnvolved in all of these uses of the Bible, in its general and
“non-religious” use as well as in its specific employment within the life
of religious communities. How exegesis is done and the impact of exe-
gesis on the use of the Bible is of special significance within the life of
these religious communities. It is within these communities and the aca-
demic institutions associated with them that exegesis and biblical inter-

--- Page 72 ---
BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis
pretation are most frequently a matter of concern and raised to the level
of conscious discussion. It is within the life of these communities that
exegetes function in their most significant roles.
Within the life of the church and synagogue, exegesis should be a con-
scious operation in all phases of the use of the Bible-in historical recon-
struction, in the formation of theology, in preaching and proclamation,
and in personal appropriation.
In this final chapter, we want to explore how the exegetical process is
related to these aspects of the use of the Bible in the life of the church
and synagogue and how the student can move from the performance of
exegesis to the utilization of exegesis in the various disciplines of bibli-
cal usage.
For Historical and
Archaeological Reconstruction
One of the results of post-Enlightenment investigations of Scripture
was the change in perspective toward biblical texts and their utilization
for historical reconstruction. Prior to this time, the story of Israel and the
early church as it was unfolded in the narratives of the Bible and in the
traditional interpretation of these narratives was regarded as historical.
How the Bible presented this story was assumed to be the “way it hap-
pened. ” The narratives were read so that the course of events was identi-
fied with the story line of the texts.
This unqualified identification of the biblical story with the history of
Israel and the early church came to be modified for several reasons. The
rise of modem science posed a serious challenge to biblical chronology.
It became clear that the earth was more than the six thousand years old
which a strict adherence to biblical chronology suggested. Historical and
documentary criticisms made clear that the Bible unfolds not one but
several “stories of Israel. ” Analysis of the literature uncovered various
sources or accounts within the Pentateuch and the historical books, each
of these presenting a different point of view. The narrative literature was
seen as motivated primarily by religious and theological interests rather
than purely historiographical concerns. That is, they were seen to be’
advocating particular perspectives or viewpoints on the history as much
as reporting history.
Similar changes occurred with respect to the New Testament. For
centuries it had been assumed, more or less uncritically, that the story
of the life of Jesus and the early church as unfolded in the four Gospels
143
and the Acts of the Apostles was the way it happened; the biblical story
was also biblical history, it was thought. What was assumed to be
needed for the Gospels was a harmonization of their accounts. Gradu-
ally it dawned on biblical interpreters that the Gospels are more theo-
logical than historical in nature. Acts also was acknowledged as a
theological writing. Scholars recognized that far from presenting a
comprehensive account of the early church, it actually only presented
an account of its growth and development westward, from Jerusalem
to Rome. Moreover, its choice of important characters was seen to be
highly selective. Rather than being a comprehensive account of “the
acts of the apostles,” on closer inspection it was discovered to be
actually an account of “some of the acts of some of the apostles,”
most notably Peter and Paul.
The radical impact on biblical studies of the post-Enlightenment
period can be seen in the way it forced interpreters to take history and
historical perspectives seriously: the Bible is a product of a historical
process and therefore has its rootage in human culture; the Bible is a
book anchored in the past and is therefore distanced in thought and out-
look from the present; and the Bible is an anthology of ancient writings
and therefore should be subjected to the same critical analysis as all other
such writings.
Today historians of Israelite and early church history, like their
“secular” counterparts, take certain stances toward the Bible and the
reconstruction of history that differ considerably from their earlier
counterparts. First of all, this involves a more critical stance toward
the sources. These are no longer taken as purely factual reporting but
as documents influenced by various theological and sociological con-
cerns, different historical contexts, and different purposes and inten-
tions. Thus a biblical text or narrative must be thoroughly exegeted
and evaluated as to how it can be used for historical reconstruction.
The exegesis of reports about what happened and the reconstruction of
what might have happened are thus closely related but are by no means
identical. Second, attempts are made to reconstruct the history without
appeal either to special divine intervention in history or miraculous
occurrences which might have altered the course of events. This repre-
sents a rather radical break with the outlook of the sources themselves
which speak of divine involvement in historical events. The modern
historian tends to consider this theological dimension in the texts to be
a reflection of the faith and theology of the communities and the
authors rather than a datum of history itself which can be studied and

--- Page 73 ---
144 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
confirmed. Third, historians are aware that they are not writing a
definitive history-‘ ‘ the history”-and narrating once and for all the
ways things actually happened. Historians recognize that they are chil-
dren of their age with biases and limited knowledge and perspectives
and that “history” is a reconstruction of the past based on the knowl-
edge and experiences of the present-often informed by a lot of
intuition.
Just as historians no longer write the history of Israel and the early
church by retelling the biblical story, neither are they any longer bound
just to the evidence of the Bible. In recent years, the discipline of
archaeology has entered the picture. Archaeological excavations and
remains, especially in the last century, have become available which
can be utilized for reconstructing historical events and conditions.
Some of these remains are written sources-inscriptions and other
texts-but most are non-written artifacts. Texts can usually be dated,
on the basis of contents, language, and mode of writing, to general his-
torical periods and often offer specific historical information. Other
artifacts, such as pottery, architectural remains, skeletons, and jew-
elry, provide general types of knowledge-information about people’s
styles of life, levels of culture, means of livelihood, and types of
habitation. All of the unwritten archaeological evidence comes out of
the ground uninterpreted. The archaeologists and historians must inter-
pret the data, generally in light of other evidence and particularly the
written sources, especially the Bible. Contrary to much popular opin-
ion the purpose of archaeology per se is neither to prove nor disprove
the Bible. Archaeology is by nature a neutral discipline. While archae-
ology can illumine the actual course of Israelite and early Christian
history, it can neither prove nor disprove the theological and faith
claims of the biblical record.
In using a biblical text to reconstruct a part of the history and archaeol-
ogy of ancient Israel and the early church, that is, in moving from exege-
sis to historical reconstruction, the biblical student must keep several
factors in mind.
(1) Exegesis of the material is a prerequisite. Exegesis will allow the
interpreter to answer such questions as: To what genre of literature
does the text belong? What type of historical information can one
expect to gain from such a genre? To what source or sources does the
text belong? What are the tendencies and theological concerns of this
source which may have influenced the particular presentation in the
text? From what historical period does the text or source come and how
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 145
might this context have influenced the text? What cultural and socio-
logical knowledge might be gained from the text? If the text does not
provide explicit and intentional historical evidence, does it provide
any implicit or unintentional evidence that can be used for historical
reconstruction?
(2) Other texts relevant to the same event or time must be exegeted
and correlated with the primary text. Often different presentations of the
same episode will be found. This is the case, for example, with many
narratives, such as those about the conquest of Canaan (Joshua l-12
compared with Judges 1) and some events in the reign of Jehoshaphat (1
Kings 22:4849  compared with 2 Chronicles 20:35-37).  After these par-
allel texts have been exegeted, they must be compared, differences
noticed and appraised, and historical probability assessed.
(3) Non-biblical source material which might relate to the issue under
consideration should be brought into consideration. Even such non-bib-
lical material must be submitted to exegesis with similar procedures
applied as those used in biblical exegesis.
(4) Relevant archaeological data should be drawn upon where this
exists or its absence noted where this is the case. Where archaeological
evidence exists, it can generally be utilized to supplement the textual
evidence. To take a specific example, this would be the case with
such evidence as material from Hazor, Megiddo, and Gezer from the
time of Solomon if one were working on the passage in 1 Kings 9: 15-16.
In other cases, archaeological evidence raises questions about the histor-
ical reliability of a biblical report. For example, Joshua 7:1-8:29
reports on the Israelite capture of a large, fortified city at Ai. Excava-
tions at the site of ancient Ai (et-tell in modern Palestine) have shown
that the site was unoccupied from about 2000 to 1150 B.C. and that after
reoccupation, the site was actually a small village not a major city. Here
we have a case where archaeological evidence calls into question the his-
toricity of a biblical account and requires a reassessment of how one
reads and uses the biblical account.
The reconstruction of an event in biblical history must, therefore, be
the consequence of correlating various forms of evidence drawn from
biblical and non-biblical literary evidence and from non-literary
archaeological evidence. The importance of each of these aspects must
be evaluated in each particular case. At the very heart of reconstruction,
however, is exegesis. Since the Bible is the primary, and at times the
only, source for reconstructing biblical history, this only emphasizes the
indispensability of the exegetical process.

--- Page 74 ---
146 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis
as an indispensable source, not only because the Bible itself, in
For Doing Theology
The task of theology, as a specialized discipline, is to articulate the
faith of the synagogue and the church for each new generation of believ-
ers. Professional theologians, both academic and ministerial, do this on
a sustained, regular basis. Active and intentional theological reflection,
however, is not the exclusive prerogative of professional theologians.
Nonprofessional or lay theologians engage in the same type of activity.
In fact, anyone who makes a conscious, concerted effort to reflect on
one’s faith and give organized shape to these reflections is engaged in
doing theology.
A dynamic way of viewing the theological task is to see it as giving
shape to all of those aspects and dimensions of faith which figure in-the
explicit formulation of belief. The theologian becomes responsible for
the whole of reality, and for all fields of knowledge, and finds it neces-
sary to bring these to bear on faith, both as a phenomenon in its own
right and as a system of thought.
As theologians reflect upon the reality of faith, its multiple dimen-
sions, and the settings in which it occurs, they find it necessary to organ-
ize and arrange these more systematic and theoretical reflections into
meaningful patterns for the benefit of the believing communities. The
theologian works from a bifocal vantage point which seeks to do full ju&
tice both to the experiential dimension of faith, the “lived lives” of the
believing communities, as well as to the more intellectual, theoretical,,’
or cognitive dimension of faith as it comes to be formulated in discursive
language. Consequently, the theologian is both informed by as well as
informs the community of believers whose faith is being systematized
and articulated.
Theologians seek to articulate the faith of each generation not only by
relating it to previous formulations of the past but also by formulating it
in terms drawn from the present. The faith thus finds itself responsible to
history but also responsible to the present as it attempts to explain the
faith to the modem world in light of modem thought and knowledge. For
this reason, the work of theologians has to be redone in each generation.
Theology achieves its task by seeking to explicate the ways in which
believers have thought about central theological realities, issues, and
problems such as God or anthropology and also by suggesting appropri-
ate ways for this to be done given the current status of intellectual
thought. In this constructive task, theologians naturally regard the Bible
147
one
sense, represents the earliest (Jewish and Christian) theological thought
but also because the Bible still functions as normative in shaping faith
and practice within modem communities of faith.
Because theologians operate with general categories and because the
Bible constitutes one source for doing theology, along with philosophy,
science, humanistic studies, as well as other fields of knowledge, the
way in which theologians use the Bible is functionally different from the
way in which a historian, a minister, or the ordinary person uses it. In
attempting to construct an imaginative theological statement about God,
the theologian will naturally consult, appeal to, and adduce those parts
of Scripture or biblical formulations and concepts which bear most
directly on this topic. At an earlier period, constructing systematic theol-
ogies was achieved in a type of proof-texting fashion, where all the
passages pertaining to or assumed to be supportive of a particular doc-
trine were collected and arranged in some ordered fashion. In the light of
modem biblical criticism, theologians now recognize this to be an
improper use of Scripture. Consequently, in their constructive theologi-
cal work, they too take into account the historical dimension of the bibli-
cal texts. Not every text concerned with a particular topic will be seen to
have equal value merely because it appears in the Bible. Theologians are
also heavily indebted to critical exegesis for its assistance in uncovering
the various theological perspectives within the Bible. Although at one
time it was more or less assumed that the Bible, from start to finish, pre-
sented a single theological message, theologians now recognize the wide
diversity or plurality of theological perspectives within Scripture and
take this into account in their theological work.
,~ *For the beginning exegete, the work of theologians can be valuable in
several ways. Because of their long-standing commitment to Scripture
as a central source in doing theology, they too engage in exegesis and are
dependent upon the results of exegetical work. The form in which their
exegetical results are presented naturally differs from that of biblical
exegetes whose work most often takes the form of commentaries or
books and articles on specific passages of Scripture.
Because theologians have examined biblical texts systematically by
proceeding from broad and general universal categories and because
they have examined a wide variety of texts as they relate to a specific
topic or category, their angle of vision can be quite useful to the begin-
ning exegete. In working on a passage, the exegete may discover that it
makes significant claims pertaining to the nature or work of God. At this

--- Page 75 ---
I 148 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
point, consulting those sections of both biblical and systematic theolo-
gies devoted to the doctrine of God will often introduce the beginning
exegete not only to rich discussions of the passage being exegeted but
also to similar treatments of other related biblical passages. Because the
form of commentaries or more specialized monographs normally does
not permit this scope of treatment, comprehensive biblical and system-
atic theologies provide a major resource of insights for the biblical
exegete .
Not only should the exegete consult the work of theologians but also
the exegete who investigates biblical texts also becomes engaged in
.gIoing theology. Any attempt to study a biblical text, to understand it in
its setting and relate it to other portions of the Bible which bear directly
on it, often engages the exegete at a profound level. The exegete not
only seeks to understand the issues presented by a text but also to engage
those issues and to allow this intellectual engagement both to inform,
sharpen, and challenge one’s own understanding of reality. At this
stage, the exegete who makes the move to more generalized perspec ives
dis making the same move as the biblical or systematic theologian.< hen
one allows the text to inform and call into question one’s own self-under-
standing and one’s understanding of the world, theology is being done;
What is important for the beginning exegete to realize is that in mov-
ing from doing exegesis to doing theology certain conceptual shifts are
made. There is clearly a broadening of focus when one moves from a
specific text to a broader range of texts. Yet, just as often, the movement
is reciprocal, because as the exegete consults a broader range of texts
and then returns to a particular text, a deeper understanding is brought to
the exegetical process. In making these moves, the beginning exegete
does well to remember that the autonomy of the text and its message
must be respected. If one discovers the message of the text being
exegeted to be in serious tension with previousIy  conceived theological
positions or reconstructions, rather than resolving the tension too easily
or too quickly, the exegete may be called on to reexamine and even radi-
cally modify previously held theological convictions. By the same
token, one may discover that exegesjs of a text tends to reinforce previ-
ously held theological convictions.$y  recognizing that such tensions are
present even within the biblical texts themselves, the exegete may not
feel as compelled to resolve them as might be the case otherwise. Famili-
arity with the history of exegesis may introduce the interpreter to various
possible resolutions and thus provide a series of hermeneutical options
for interpreting the text itself.
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 149
The exegete who also engages in doing theology should remain
responsible to the canons and norms of biblical exegesis. Indeed, in
doing exegesis one will discover how pervasively exegetical the theolog-
ical enterprise is and how theological the exegetical enterprise is. Where
sacred texts exist, exegesis is required and remains indispensable to all
systematic attempts to relate the message of a specific biblical text to the
broader theological message and the formulation of belief.
For Proclamation
Employing the Bible in preaching presupposes that the biblical text is
a central ingredient and for this reason exegesis is a fundamental prereq-
uisite. Yet it is just as important to remember that exegesis and procla-
mation are distinct activities. The transition from text to sermon is a
natural transition, but it is a transition nevertheless. It is as much of a
mistake to assume that proclamation consists of doing exegesis as it is to
assume that exegesis is essentially a form of preaching. Both exegesis
and preaching may inform each other, but they should not be merged
into a single, undifferentiated activity.
Using the Bible for the purpose of proclamation constitutes a distinc-
tive function and presupposes a clearly defined “life setting.” What dis-
tinguishes this use of the Bible from the one previously discussed, that of
doing theology, may be said to be its occasional nature, as much as any-
thing else. Both the professional theologian and the preacher have as
their task the articulation of the faith in a modem setting. They both seek
to bring to bear the whole of reality on the biblical text as they seek to
interpret it, but they also seek to appropriate the text for a modem setting
as it too is informed and shaped by the whole body of knowledge. Here
we see that the minister, too, is theologian, albeit in a qualified sense.
Both obviously are professionals in that both have clearly defined voca-
tions and both take seriously the canonical status of the Scripture and its
revelatory value.
The minister’s task differs from the academic theologian’s task in at
least two ways. First, the situation which the minister addresses in the
act of proclamation is more concrete and more specific and for this rea-
son the act of proclamation is more occasional. When the Word of God
is brought to bear at a given moment for a people congregated for the
express purpose of “hearing the Word of God,” something momentary
and unrepeatable happens. No attempt is being made to state in a broad,
generalized sense the meaning of faith for the contemporary setting.

--- Page 76 ---
150 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 151
Preaching is rather quite specific in its focus, and there is the awareness
that once the congregation disperses, the moment of proclamation is
over. The sermon may be preserved in the form of a written manuscript
or tape recording but the initial act of proclamation cannot be recovered.
This occasional dimension of proclamation is distinctive.
Also distinctive, as compared with the task of doing theology, is the
nature of the audience. The intended audience of the theologian is nor-
mally the church at large, while the intended audience of the preacher is
a visible, local congregation. The respective “life settings” are distin-
guishable in both size and location.
The exegetical task in these respectively different “life settings” is
similar in some respects, different in others. The preacher, like the pro-
fessional theologian, stands at the end of a long process of interpreta-
tion, and is responsible for recognizing the multiple dimensions of the
biblical text, such as its historical and literary dimensions. Similarly, the
preacher does well to acknowledge the diversity of theological outlook
reflected within the biblical writings.
Because the homiletical task is so often directly anchored in a biblical
text, whether in the form of a lectionary where the texts have been cho-
sen in advance, or whether the choice of text is made by the individual
preacher, proclamation often bears a more genetic relationship to exege-
sis than does theology. Especially is this the case with expository
preaching, where the intention is to expound a biblical text or to invite
the audience to enter and share the world of the text.
Whether a sermon is explicitly expository in that it seeks to unfold a
biblical text for a congregation, or whether it is only implicitly exposi-
tory in that it alludes to biblical texts or images in the course of making a
broader point, the preacher nevertheless should be responsible to the
canons of biblical exegesis. In fact, it might be said that biblical exegesis
is as essential to the preacher’s task as the Bible is to the preacher’s ser-
mon. If the sermon is pervasively biblical, the preacher’s task is preemi-
nently exegetical. If the sermon is only occasionally biblical, the
preacher is no less obligated to practice responsible exegesis than is oth-
erwise the case.
Moving from an exegesis to a sermon is not a simple matter. In fact;
the process has two foci: the text with its ancient context and the sermon
with its modem context. The tasks and problems involved in this move
may be stated in three questions: How does one translate the form and
content of the original text into another form and content? How does one
assess both the ancient and modern contexts in order to see analogies and
patterns of relationships? How can one be responsible to both the text
and its context or the sermon and its context?
One way of beginning to grapple with the movement from text to ser-
mon is to explore the way in which a text or tradition may have func-
tioned in its original context or within the life of Israel and the early
church. Broadly speaking, a text and its message can function in at least
three ways: constitutively, prophetically, or advisorily. These three
functions may be related to the three basic forms of ministry: priest,
prophet, and sage (or teacher). This division is, of course, somewhat
artificial and is offered merely as a lens through which to view the vari-
ous ways a text can be used. Just as the various functions of ministry
overlap and were and are frequently embodied in the same person or in a
single act of ministry, so also a single text or tradition may function in
more than one fashion depending on the manner and context of its usage.
To speak of a constitutive or priestly function of a text refers to its use
in a supportive, enhancing, and celebrative fashion. Priestly or constitu-
tive functions deal with human existence in terms of the reenactment of
past experiences and traditions, normal sacred practice, and routine con-
ditions. Festivals and rituals give expression to this mode of ministry
which is oriented to the stabilization and encouragement of the commu-
nity and individual and the appropriation of the past with its structures
and words of salvation and redemption. In such, identity and self-under-
standing are not really called into question. This does not mean that
judgment is not an aspect of the priestly function and usage since the tra-
ditions and rituals embody the ideal and thus function as a means of
assessing present realities.
The prophetic function and text challenges the present, its commit-
ments and orientation, and calls for new and sometimes radical revision
and alteration. The prophetic perspective critically views the present and
the contemporary in terms of new viewpoints and different orientations.
These perspectives challenge and sometimes threaten the identity, self-
understanding, and customary behavior of the community. The pro-
phetic may issue its challenge by drawing upon the traditions and views
of the past or by appeal to the future. It may be a word of judgment and
conviction or a word of hope and persuasion. It may announce death or
life, but it is a word strongly evaluative of present conditions. It seeks
not to constitute but to reconstitute.
The advisory function-the function of the sage or the wise-has as
its goal the offering of instruction, wisdom, or insight without the overt
desire either to confirm the present and its conditions or to call for recon-

--- Page 77 ---
152 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
stitution or reformation. It makes its appeal on the basis of general expe-
rience and seeks to illuminate rather than create conditions. Such
illumination, however, may itself be catalytic and open up new perspec-
tives which can lead to reconstitution.
The exegete in moving from an exegesis of the text to a sermon on the
text should keep in mind both thepriginal function of the text and the
perceived function of the sermon(The  function of the sermon within its
context should not do damage to or be irresponsible to the original func-
tion and meaning of the text.The exegete as minister will, of course,
have to assess the present needs and conditions of the audience as well as
the intent of the preaching occasion and determine whether the sermon
should function constitutively, prophetically, or advisorily. When bring-
ing the message of the ancient text to bear on the modem situation, the
role of analogy is immt. The preacher should ask such questions as
the following: What situation in the contemporary world and the imme-
diate congregation is analogous to the situation addressed in the text?
How are the participants in the modern situation analogous to those-the
speaker, the audience, ancient Israel, the early church-in the original
situation? What formand content should be given in and to the sermon in-- .._ . . ._
order for it to serve an analogous function in the modem situation as the
text in its situation? How can the total context of “what it meant”
inform and enlighten -“what it means”?
Preaching from teble ,and attempting to remain responsible to tho
text do not mean that the minister cannot orchestrate the text differently,
by calling forth and emphasizing dimensions of the text that are actually
recessive rather than dominant within the text. The minister may choose
to tone down or modify dominant themes within the text. Here, the min-
ister’s role is not unlike that of the orchestra conductor who interprets a
musical score. By respecting the autonomy of the text, the conductor
may leave the score completely intact, making no attempt to change the
original composer’s musical message, yet after having thoroughly
examined and studied the&ore, the conductor may feel free to interpret
the piece for a particular occasion. This form of orchestration does no
injustice to the composer’s intentions. It is rather the conductor’s
responsibility to interpret the text for modem listeners.
Similarly, the minister’s task is to read and to understand, and also to
interpret the text for the modem congregation of believers. This may
mean that the minister’s sermon “orchestrates” the text variously from
time to time, but this can be done without doing injustice to the text or
without engaging in irresponsible exegesis.
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 153
The exegetical procedures, when they detect the multilayered quality
of some texts, may in fact open up a text to multiple preaching possibili-
ties. A parable of Jesus, for example, may be orchestrated in preaching
according to a diversity of “original” contexts-in the ministry of
Jesus, in the oral tradition of the church, and in its diverse usage in Mat-
thew, Mark, and Luke.
Finally, the exegete-preacher must be warned that the one who
engages in thorough exegesis may often discover that certain interpreta-
tions of texts, even cherished ones, are not viable, and cannot be incor-
porated into a sermon. Here, the negative function of exegesis is at
work, placing limitations on the minister, even as it does in other ways
on the historian or theologian.
For Personal Appropriation
Just as the Bible is the possession of historians, theologians, and
preachers, so is it the possession of all who read it for moral guidance,
spiritual edification, or even pleasure. The person who reads the Bible
for these purposes may not be motivated by professional interests, but
this does not mean that exegesis is any less absent or necessary. If exege-
sis is the process through which one comes to an informed understanding
of a biblical text, it becomes as essential for the nonprofessional reader
as it is for the professional reader. For that matter, the professional
reader who reads the Bible for personal appropriation does not cease to
do exegesis when such a shift in purpose occurs. That one does exegesis
does not change, although why one does exegesis may change.
Rather than viewing the work of biblical scholars and other profes-
sional theologians and historians as preliminary or as that which can be
laid aside when one reads the Bible for personal profit, the everyday
reader can see oneself as part of a larger circle of interested readers and
interpreters who, in the end, have a common interest. Those who have
devoted full-time study to the Bible have most often done so in order to
render service to those who cannot. When scholars are seen as working
in the service of communities of faith, even if their work and the results
of their research may appear to the layperson to be inimical to the faith
and their efforts not always applauded, they should at least be taken seri-
ously as one seeks to read and understand the Bible.
When the Bible is read for moral and spiritual guidance, the reader
may be said to assume the position of “hearer,” analogous to that of the
original hearers to whom the writing was addressed. It will never be pos-

--- Page 78 ---
154 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
sible to escape the “third party” perspective discussed earlier, for sub-
sequent readers of the Bible will always be those who overhear, rather
than those who hear directly. Yet, the biblical writings have become
canonized precisely because of their demonstrated capacity to transcend
the immediate situation which they addressed, and historically they have
done so. Regardless of their time-conditioned quality, they nevertheless
possess an immediacy and the capability to address hearers and readers
of subsequent ages quite directly. What distinguishes the one who reads
the Bible for moral and spiritual guidance from the one who reads it in
the service of history, theology, or preaching is the immediacy of the
relationship between text and reader. Behind this stance is the assump-
tion that the text is speaking or can speak directly to the needs of the
reader.
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 155
This need not mean that one should read the Bible any less rigor-
ously, certainly not any less critically, for the purposes of personal
appropriation. Under no circumstances should one suspend critical
judgment in reading the biblical text. Reading the Bible for moral and
spiritual guidance also requires the reader to interrogate the text, and to
do so rigorously, but the set of questions one brings to such a reading
may differ vastly from those the historian brings to the text. One does
well to remember that many of the procedures of biblical interpretation
developed in response to questions which had arisen in the context of
reading the Bible for personal and spiritual guidance. In fact, most, if
not all, of the types of criticism discussed in the earlier chapters have
been developed and refined as a means of making this type of Bible
reading more, not less, understandable. Reading of the Bible for per-
sonal appropriation should be as attentive to the various dimensions of
the text which these various techniques address as reading the Bible for
professional reasons.
in,” as it were. This need not imply a negative stance, nor even a
detached, disinterested relationship to the text, but it is correct to say that
the historian and theologian, as well as the preacher, are all using the
text for some other purpose. For them, the biblical text has an indirect
rather than a direct function, whereas for the one who reads the Bible for
personal and spiritual edification, the text is often being read for its own
sake. It is not unlike the difference between one who reads Shakespeare
as a literary critic and one who does so for pleasure, for sheer intellectual
stimulation, or for moral edification. While the latter sorts of concerns
may originally have motivated the literary critic, and while they may
continue to occur even as the literary critic carries out his or her profes-
sional work, the work of literary criticism, by its very nature, requires
the reader to “look at” the text in a way that is functionally different
from “looking along” the text.
Reading the Bible for personal appropriation should not be conceived
in a narrowly personalistic sense as if the person’s own spiritual or moral
needs are always the primary end in view. Even the use of the Bible by
artists should be included here. When the Bible is read and appropriated
through artistic creativity, whether it is in the form of music, painting,
drama, or any of the other forms of artistic expression, exegesis is also
carried out, even if it appears to be implicit. Handel’s Messiah presup-
poses an exegesis of various portions of the Bible, as does MacLeish’s
JB, and in both cases the biblical text has been read and exegeted prior to
the artistic production which has resulted from such interpretation.
Indeed, these resulting interpretations are not essentially different from
other forms of interpretation, including historical, theological, homileti-
Cal, or ethical interpretations. They differ only in form, not in essence.
Professional exegetes may also learn much from these artistic appropria-
tions of the Bible and biblical themes.
One way of articulating the stance or perspective of those who read The beginning exegete should be alert to the various ways within
the Bible for personal and spiritual guidance is to recognize that they modem culture in which the biblical text is appropriated and should by
“look along” the text more than “look at” the text. The former stance now realize that exegesis is common to all of them. One might well ask
suggests the picture of one who is inside the text, standing within the whether Zeffirelli’s film, The Gospel According to St. Matthew, is best
tradition as it were, adopting the perspectives and outlooks suggested in understood as a form of historical reconstruction or artistic appropria-
the text, or at least, doing so provisionally. On reflection upon such tion, or even as a kind of theological reconstruction if not biblical procla-
reading, one may decide to adopt the posture and paradigms of the text, mation. It may turn out to be some of each, but this should come as no
adapt them, or even reject them as unacceptable, but there is at least the surprise, for we have seen that even the historian who deals with the bib-
initial willingness to place oneself within the range of the voice of the lical texts, at certain junctures, must also deal with literary, theological,
text and be willing both to hear and see. The latter stance-“looking homiletical, moral, and artistic dimensions of the texts. Modem readers
at”-suggests the picture of one standing outside the text, “looking of the Bible often find themselves sensitive to the many dimensions of

--- Page 79 ---
156 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
the biblical text. The beginning exegete who wishes to read the Bible
with an informed understanding can do no less.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Exegesis and Historical-Archaeological Reconstruction
Abraham, W. J., Divine Revelation and the Limits of Historical Criticism
(London/New York: Oxford University Press, 1982).
Albright, W. F., “Archaeology Confronts Biblical Criticism” in American
Scholar 7 (1938) 176-88.
Barr, J., “Story and History in Biblical Theology” in Journal of Religion 56
(1976) 1-17.
Dahl, N. A., “The Problem of the Historical Jesus” in his The Crucified Mes-
siah and Other Essays (Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1974) 48-
89.
*Dever,  W. G., Archaeology and Biblical Studies: Retrospects and Prospects
(Evanston: Seabury-Western, 1974).
Dever, W. G., “Archaeology” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, Supple-
mentary Volume, 44-52.
Dever, W. G., “Biblical Theology and Biblical Archaeology” in Harvard
Theological Review 73 (1980) 1-15.
*Finkelstein, J. J., “The Bible, Archaeology, and History: Have the Excava-
tions Corroborated Scripture?” in Commentary 28 (1959) 341-49.
*Harvey, V. A., The Historian und the Believer (New York/London: Macmillan
Company/SCM Press, 1966/1967;  reissued, Philadelphia: Westminster Press,
1981).
Jeremias, J., The Problem of the Historical Jesus (rev. ed.; Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1971).
Lapp, P. W., Archaeology and History (New York: World Publishing Com-
pany, 1969).
McArthur, H. K., The Quest Through the Centuries: The Search for the Histori-
caZ Jesus (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1966).
McArthur,  H. K., In Search of the Historical Jesus (New York/London: Charles
Scribner’s Sons/SPCK, 1969/1970).
*Miller, J. M., The Old Testament and the Historian (Philadelphia/London: For-
tress Press/SPCK, 1976).
Sasson, J. M., “On Choosing Models for Recreating Israelite Pre-Monarchic
History” in Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 21 (1981) 3-24.
Schweitzer, A., The Quest of the Historical Jesus: A Critical Study of Its Prog-
ress from Reimarus to Wrede (London/New York: A. & C. Black/Macmillan
Company, 1910/1950).
Wright, G. E., “What Archaeology Can and Cannot Do” in Biblical Archaeolo-
gist 34 (1971) 70-76.
de Vaux, R., “On Right and Wrong Uses of Archaeology” in Near Eastern
Archaeology in, the Twentieth Century (ed. by J. A. Sanders; Garden City*
Doubleday & Company, 1970) 64-80.
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 157
Exegesis and Doing Theology
Achtemeier, P. J., An Introduction to the New Hermeneutic (Philadelphia: West-
minster Press, 1969).
Barr, J., “Biblical Theology” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, Supple-
mentary Volume, 104-l 1.
Barth, K., Church Dogmatics (Edinburgh/New York: T. & T. Clark/Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1936 l/l. 98-212.
Bartlett, D. L., The Shape of Scriptural Authority (Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1983).
Childs, B. S., Biblical Theology in Crisis (Philadelphia: Westminster Press,
1970).
Ebeling, G., “The Meaning of Biblical Theology” in his Word and Faith (Phil-
adelphia/London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1963) 79-97.
Frei, H. W., Eclipse of Biblical Narrative: A Study in Eighteenth and Nineteenth
Century Hemeneutics (New Haven/London: Yale University Press, 1974).
Hanson, P. D., The Diversity ofscripture: A Theological Interpretation (Phila-
delphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
Johnston, R. K. (ed.), The Use of the Bible in Theology: Evangelical Options
(Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1985).
Kaufman, G. D., “What Shall We Do with the Bible?” in Interpretation 25
(1971) 95-l 12.
*Kehm, G., “Scripture and Tradition” in Christian Theology: An Zntroduction
to Its Tradition and Tusks (ed. by P. C. Hodgson and R. H. King; Philadel-
phia: Fortress Press, 1982).
*Kelsey, D. H., The Uses of Scripture in Recent Theology (Philadelphia/
London: Fortress Press/SCM Press, 1975/1976).
*Kelsey, D. H., “The Bible and Christian Theology ” in Journal of the Ameri-
can Academy of Religion 48 (1980) 385-402.
McKim, D. K., What Christians Believe About the Bible (Nashville: Thomas
Nelson, 1985).
McKim, D. K. (ed.), A Guide to Contemporary Hermeneutics: Major Trends in
Biblical Interpretation (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company,
1986).
Nineham, D., The Use and Abuse of the Bible (London/New York: Macmillan
Press Ltd./Barnes and Noble, 1976).
Pannenberg, W., “The Crisis of the Scripture Principle” in his Basic Questions
in Theology: Collected Essays (Philadelphia/London: Fortress Press/SCM
Press, 1970) 1. 1-14.
Rahner, K., “Exegesis and Dogmatic Theology” in his Theological Znvestigu-
tions (New York/London: Seabury Press/Darton, Longman and Todd, 1966)
5. 67-93.
Smart, J. D., The Past, Present, and Future of Biblical Theology (Philadelphia/
Edinburgh: Westminster Press/T. & T. Clark, 1979/1980).
Stendahl, K., “Biblical Theology, Contemporary” in Interpreter’s Dictionary
of the Bible, 1.418-32.
*Stroup, G., “Revelation” in Christian Theology: An Introduction to Its Tradi-

--- Page 80 ---
158 BIBLICAL EXEGESIS: A Beginner’s Handbook
tions and Tusks (ed. by P. C. Hodgson and R. H. King; Philadelphia: Fortress Smith, D. M., Znterpreting  the Gospels for Preaching (Philadelphia: Fortress
Press, 1982). Press, 1980).
Wainwright, A., Beyond Biblical Criticism: Encountering Jesus in Scripture
(Atlanta/London: John Knox Press/SPCK,  1982).
Exegesis and Proclamation
Thiselton, A. C., The Two Horizons: New Testament Hermeneutics and Philo-
sophical Description (Exeter/Grand  Rapids: Paternoster Press/Eerdmans Pub-
lishing Company, 1979/1980).
Achtemeier, E., The Old Testament and the Proclamation of the Gospel (Phila-
delphia: Westminster Press, 1973).
Thompson, W. D., Preaching Biblically: Exegesis and Interpretation (Nash-
ville: Abingdon Press, 198 1).
Barclay, W., Communicating the Gospel (Edinburgh: St. Andrews Press,
1978).
*Barrett, C. K., Biblical Preaching and Biblical Scholarship (London: Epworth
Press, 1957) = Biblical Problems and Biblical Preaching (Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1964) 28-49.
Exegesis and Personal Appropriation
Barr, J., The Bible in the Modern World (London/New York: SCM Press/Harper
&Row, 1977).
*Best, E., From Text to Sermon: Responsible Use of the New Testament in
Preaching (Atlanta/Edinburgh: John Knox Press/St. Andrews Press, 1978).
Brown, R. E., “Hermeneutics” in The Jerome Biblical Commentary (ed. by R.
E. Brown et al.; Englewood Cliffs/London: Prentice-Hall/Geoffrey Chap-
man, 1968) 2.605-23.
*Brueggemann, W., The Creative Word: Canon as a Model for Biblical Educa-
tion (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
Capps, D., Biblical Approaches to Pastoral Counseling (Philadelphia: West-
minster Press, 1981).
Cox, J. W., A Guide to Biblical Preaching (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1976).
Craddock, F. B., Overhearing the Gospel: Preaching and Teaching the Faith to
Persons Who Have Already Heurd  (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1978).
Craddock, F. B., As One Without Authority (3d ed.; Nashville: Abingdon Press,
1979).
Craddock, F. B., “Occasion-Text-Sermon” in Interpretation 35 (1981) 59-
*CTiddock F. B Preaching (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1985) 99-150.
Fuller, R. H., Thz Use of the Bible in Preaching (Philadelphia/London: Fortress
Press/Bible Reading Fellowship, 1981).
Gowan, D. E., Reclaiming the Old Testamentfor the Christian Pulpit (Atlanta/
Edinburgh: John Knox Press/T. & T. Clark, 1980/1981).
Keck, L. E., The Bible in the Pulpit: The Renewal of Biblical Preaching (Nash-
ville: Abingdon Press, 1978).
Keck, L. E., “Listening To and Listening For: From Text to Sermon (Acts
1:8)” in Interpretation 27 (1973) 184-202.
Keck, L. E., Taking the Bible Seriously (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1979).
Manson,  T. W., “Preaching and Exegesis” in Neutestamentliche Studien fiir
RudolfBultmann  (ed. by W. Eltester; Berlin: Alfred Topelmann,  1954) lO-
14.
Mezger, M . , “Preparation for Preaching-The Route from Exegesis to Procla-
mation” in Journal for Theology and the Church 2 (1965) 159-79.
Murphy, R. E. (ed.), Theology, Exegesis, and Proclamation (New York/Edin-
burgh: Herder and Herder/T. & T. Clark, 1971).
Sanders, J. A., “Hermeneutics” in Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, Sup-
plementary Volume, 402-7.
Davidson, R., The Bible in Religious Education (Edinburgh/New York: Handsel
Press/Columbia University Press, 1980).
*Gustafson, J. M., “The Place of Scripture in Christian Ethics: A Methodologi-
cal Study” and “The Relation of the Gospels to the Moral Life” in his Theol-
ogy and Christian Ethics (New York: Pilgrim Press, 1974) 121-59.
Gustafson, J. M., Christ and the Moral Life (Chicago/London: University of
Chicago Press, 1979).
Holmer, P. L., The Grammar of Faith (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1978).
Sleeper, C. F., “Ethics as a Context for Biblical Interpretation” in Znterpreta-
tion 22 (1968) 443-60.
*Wink, W., The Bible in Human Transformation: Towards a New Paradigm for
Biblical Study (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1973).
Wink, W., Transforming Bible Study: A Leader’s Guide (Nashville/London:
Abingdon Press/SCM Press, 1980).
Sanders, J. A., God Has  a Story Too: Sermons in Context (Philadelphia: For-
tress Press, 1979).
Smart, J. D., The Strange Silence of the Bible in the Church: A Study in Herme-
neutics (Philadelphia/London: Westminster Press/SCM Press, 1970).
Employing the Fruits of Biblical Exegesis 159

--- Page 81 ---
REVISED EDITION
BIBLICAL EXEGESISA Beginner’s Handbook
John H. Hayes Carl R. Hollactay
Hayes and Holladay have revised and expanded their bestseller on exegesis!
This introductory tool for students doing Old and New Testament exegesis has
been updated to include: an improved bibliography, additional illustrations,
additional sections on structuralist/rhetorical/“new”  criticism and canonical
criticism, plus new material on the use of concordances and on current
developments including the influence of liberation and feminist perspectives on
exegetical work.
The new edition retains the features of the first edition: a minimum of
technical terms, solid introductory guidelines in exegetical method, and a valuable
presentation of exegetical theory and practice. The new edition is even more ideal
for general introductory courses in Old and New Testament, exegesis courses on
specific books, homiletics and preaching courses, and courses focusing on
historical topics.
First edition reviews-
“The best of its type. A unified treatment of the Hebrew Bible and the New
Testament. ” -RELIGIOUS STUDIES REVIEW
“Clear and concise. A fine adjunct for college and seminary courses. ”
-THE BIBLE TODAY
“‘Recommended as an introduction to biblical exegesis for students. Easy to read, yet it
provides an excellent discussion of theory and practice. ”
-THE THEOLOGICAL EDUCATOR
“The most useful exegetical handbook currentb available to beginning students.”
-CATHOLIC BIBLICAL QUARTERLY
JOHN H. HAYES, Professor of Old
Testament, Candler School of Theology,
Emory University, is the author of numer-
ous works on the Bible and the editor of the
KNOX PREACHING GUIDES (also
from John Knox Press).
CARL R. HOLLADAY, Professor
of New Testament, Candler School of
Theology, Emory University, is the
author of various studies of the Bible.
I o-8042-003 l-9