--- Page 1 ---
LF 5 0 q 
A SYMPOSIUM ON BIBLICAL HERMENEUTICS Edited by Gordon M. Hyde 
. . rightly handling the word of truth." 
Prepared by the 
Biblical Research Committee 
General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists

--- Page 2 ---
(3 Copyright, 1974, by the 
General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists 
Printed by 
The Review and Herald Publishing Association 
Washington, D.C.

--- Page 3 ---
Dedicated to 
Walter E. Read 
Chairman, Biblical Research Committee 
1952 - 1958

--- Page 4 ---
EDITOR'S PREFACE  
Throughout their short history Seventh-day Adventists have 
thought of themselves as people of the Book--people of the Bible. 
They have accepted its authority in the tradition of the Protes-
tant Reformation, which arose on the wings of the "Bible only" 
principle--that Scripture is to be interpreted by itself rather 
than by external traditions or philosophies. 
The general membership of the Seventh-day Adventist Church 
may have been only dimly aware of the challenges to this principle 
that have come from various forms of biblical criticism. Recent 
generations of the Church, however, in their quest for advanced 
education have had increasing exposure to the presuppositions and 
methodologies that have challenged the Protestant principle. This 
fact has led the Biblical Research Committee of the General Con-
ference of Seventh-day Adventists in recent years to concentrate 
its work in the areas of (1) revelation-inspiration--the ground 
of the Bible's authority, and (2) biblical hermeneutics--the prin-
ciples by which to derive the intended meaning. 
Some two years ago the North American Division of the General 
Conference decided to call a series of Bible Conferences in 1974 
for the benefit of the pastoral, evangelistic, and Bible-teaching 
ministries in particular. The Biblical Research Committee and 
its officers were drawn into the planning of these conferences. 
They suggested that the agenda of the Bible Conferences be built 
around the revelation-inspiration and hermeneutical issues. 
It was about that same time that the Biblical Research Com-
mittee had a series of papers in progress dealing with biblical 
hermeneutics, and it was decided that these be drawn into a sym-
posium to be printed prior to the Bible Conferences as resource 
material prepared to meet the particular needs of the ministry. 
A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics presents the God-to-man 
downreach of the processes of revelation and inspiration as the 
foundation of the Bible's authority. It proceeds then to trace 
the history of the principles by which the Bible has been inter-
preted during the Christian era. It includes a survey of the 
sources, courses, and effects of the presuppositions and method-
ologies of modern biblical criticism, especially in their impact 
on the authority of the Bible. 
For the guidelines provided, consideration is given to the 
ways in which inspired writers use and interpret earlier inspired 
writings. The Symposium then moves to a review of the principles 
by which the Seventh-day Adventist Church (following largely in 
iv

--- Page 5 ---
the Reformation tradition) interprets the Bible. The presentation 
of general principles undergirds consideration of such categories 
of biblical literature as prophetic, typological, symbolic, apoca-
lyptic, eschatological, poetic, wisdom, and historical. 
The chapters of this Symposium are essentially a series of 
essays, with the limitations of space, a minimum of quoted materi-
als, and the general absence of footnoting and full documentation. 
For the guidance of the minister-reader particularly, an introduc-
tory annotated reading list representing various points of view 
is provided at the end of most of the chapters. Although the 
individuality of the several contributors is evident, there is 
an essential consensus on accepted presuppositions and principles 
that gives a unity of perspective to the Symposium. This consen-
sus reflects to a considerable degree the work of the Biblical 
Research Committee. 
The chapter on the application of hermeneutic principles to 
the work of preaching is indicative of the hope of all of the con-
tributors to this Symposium that the ministers and Bible teachers 
of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, as a result of their study 
of this volume, will be even more confident of the authority of 
the Bible, of the integrity of their biblical exposition, and of 
the urgency of their divine mandate to "preach the word." 
The steady erosion of confidence in the authority of the 
Bible as God's revelation to man may give unique significance to 
the following prediction that was made early in Seventh-day 
Adventist history: 
(But) God will have a people upon the earth to 
maintain the Bible, and the Bible only, as the stand-
ard of all doctrines and the basis of all reforms.--
Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, p. 595. 
--Gordon M. Hyde 
Secretary of the Biblical Research Committee and a general 
field secretary of the General Conference of Seventh-day Advent-
ists since 1969, Dr. Gordon M. Hyde's education, pastoral and 
teaching ministries have been divided between England and the 
United States. He received the Ph.D. degree from Michigan State 
University in 1963 and wrote a case study approach to the Washing-
ton preaching of Peter Marshall for his dissertation.

--- Page 6 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
In addition to his appreciation of the work of the individual 
contributors to this Symposium, the editor wishes to acknowledge 
specific indebtedness to the following persons and organizations: 
Andrews and Loma Linda Universities, for accommodation of 
committee meetings. 
Review and Herald Publishing Association, for unprecedented 
cooperation in meeting printing deadlines with utmost economy. 
General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, for appropria-
tions in support of the project. 
Biblical Research Committee of the General Conference, which 
has vetted this project with enthusiasm and candor. 
E. Edward Zinke, meticulous and unflagging alter ego, critic, 
and collaborator in the Biblical Research office. 
Willis J. Hackett, amiable and discerning vice-president of 
the General Conference, who has served with genuine interest as 
chairman of the Biblical Research Committee. 
Norval F. Pease, for his invaluable aid in speeding the 
editorial process, particularly for the West Coast contributions. 
Authors and publishers, who by accepting the tradition of 
permitting their works to be referred to and commented upon, 
serve the goals of shared knowledge and viewpoint. 
Typists, copy editor, and proofreaders, who worked with a 
sense of involvement to prepare photo-ready copy before the print-
ing deadline date. 
vi

--- Page 7 ---
ABBREVIATIONS  
OT 	 Old Testament 
NT 	 New Testament 
JB 	 Jerusalem Bible 
LXX 	 The Septuagint 
MT 	 Masoretic Text 
NAB 	 New American Bible 
NASB 	 New American Standard Bible 
NEB 	 New English Bible 
RSV 	 Revised Standard Version 
AA 	 The Acts of the Apostles 
CT 	 Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students 
DA 	 The Desire of Ages 
Ed 	 Education 
Ev 	 Evangelism 
FE 	 Fundamentals of Christian Education 
GC 	 The Great Controversy 
MH 	 The Ministry of Healing 
PK 	 Prophets and Kings 
PP 	 Patriarchs and Prophets 
TM 	 Testimonies to Ministers and Gospel Workers 
vii

--- Page 8 ---
CON T EN TS  
I. INTRODUCTION TO HERMENEUTICS  
1. Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics  	 1 
Raoul Dederen 
II. HISTORY OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION  
2. Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age 
Siegfried H. Horn 
3. Interpretation of the Bible in the Early 
and Medieval Church 
Kenneth A. Strand and 
Walter B. Douglas 
4. Hermeneutical Principles and Biblical Authority 
in Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 47 
V. Norskov Olsen 
5. Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies  	 67 
E. Edward Zinke 
6. Modern Protestant Conservative Biblical 
	
Studies in America   89 
Kenneth A. Strand 
7. Biblical Interpretation in the 
	
Advent Movement   109 
Don F. Neufeld 
III. INSPIRED WRITERS' INTERPRETATION 
OF INSPIRED WRITINGS  
8. New Testament Uses and Interpretation 
of the Old Testament   127 
Frank B. Holbrook 
9. Ellen G. White's Evaluation 
and Use of the Bible 
Raymond F. Cottrell 
viii 
17 
29 
143

--- Page 9 ---
IV. PRINCIPLES OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION 
10. General Principles of Interpretation 
Gerhard F. Hasel 
11. Interpretation of Biblical History, 
Wisdom, and Poetry 
Bernard E. Se ton 
12. Interpretation of Symbols, Types, 
Allegories, aid Parables 
W. G. C. Murdoch 
13. Interpretation of Prophetic and 
Apocalyptic Prophecy 
Hans K. LaRondelle 
V. INTERPRETATION IN PROCLAMATION  
14. Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	  251 
Norval F. Pease 
APPENDIX 
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 	 
Sakae Kubo and 
Leona G. Running 
163 
195 
209 
225 
265 
ix

--- Page 10 ---
With a background of 17 years of min-
istry and teaching in Belgium and 
France, Dr. Raoul Dederen is professor 
of theology and chairman of the depart-
ment of theology and Christian philoso-
phy at the Seventh-day Adventist Theo-
logical Seminary, Andrews University, 
Berrien Springs, Michigan, where he has 
served since 1964, the year in which 
his doctoral studies were completed at 
the University of Geneva. His disser-
tation was a study of the origins of 
Old Catholicism and the ecumenical 
movement in the context of Vatican 
Council I.

--- Page 11 ---
PART 	 I 
INTRODUCTION TO HERMENEUTICS 
1. Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics  
RAOUL DEDEREN 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
The Bible holds an eminent place in the history of mankind 
and in the life of Christians. There have been and still are 
other influential religious writings, known and venerated by large 
groups of people. We could mention for their long-lasting role 
Islam's Koran, the Hindu Vedas and Brahmanas, the Buddhist Writ-
ings, and the Taoist Principles. Unquestionably, however, none 
of these has known a dissemination comparable to that of the Chris-
tian Scriptures, scattered today all over the world and translated 
into almost every language of any importance. No other volume has 
aroused so universal an interest nor left so profound an impact. 
Even so, such considerations are of but little value to the 
Christian. Even if it were ignored by the rest of mankind, the 
Bible would remain in his view what he knows it to be. To Christ's 
disciple the Bible is not merely one of man's outstanding reli-
gious productions but also a book of unique dimension that keeps 
it distinct within the category of all religious realities: it is 
the Word of God. The Bible is the place where God is encountered, 
where His message is spoken and His will is proclaimed. 
Interpreting the Scriptures  
God has spoken! But what has He said? Every utterance, 
every written document, demands interpretation. And the need in- 
creases in proportion to the distance the text stands in time and

--- Page 12 ---
2 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
culture from our own. The more remote the writer is in time and 
place from his hearers and the more the opinions and circumstances 
of his age and country differ from ours, the more there is need 
for specific rules to understand his statements. A gap is to be 
bridged and obstacles to understanding are to be removed. This is 
precisely the purpose and aim of hermeneutics, or hermeneutic--the 
distinction between the two forms of the word is immaterial. Al-
though somewhat unfamiliar, the term is derived from a Greek word 
that means to interpret, to explain. Biblical hermeneutics is the 
science of correctly understanding the Scriptures, of observing 
principles whereby God's Word can be correctly and profoundly read. 
Its object is to determine the thought the biblical writers had in 
mind and expressed in words under specific circumstances. 
Interpreting Scripture, I believe, is a stewardship we have 
from God. It is part of "the ministry of the Word" (Acts 6:4), as 
exemplified by the Lord Himself. Indeed, in Luke's account of the 
walk of the risen Christ with the two disciples on the way to 
Emmaus this Gospel writer tells us that Jesus, "beginning with 
Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted ["digrmOneusen"] to 
them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself" (Lu 24: 
27, RSV). 
Hardly any study could be more important than the science of 
hermeneutics as applied to the Scriptures, for they alone are able 
to instruct us for salvation. In its absence, a crass literal 
interpretation of the Bible without regard to idiom, context, or 
literary form in which a statement has been made is often the re-
sult, the outgrowth of a misguided determination to cling to a 
superficial understanding of the Bible at all cost, even the cost 
of real understanding. Thus, for lack of a sound hermeneutic, 
scriptural statements more than once have been uncritically and 
unrealistically applied to Christian morality. Because the patri-
archs practiced polygamy, some have claimed, we may practice it 
too; or because the Scriptures make certain remarks about the 
suffering of woman in childbirth we are not to approve any method 
of easing the pain. 
How can we ascertain what God has declared in Scripture? How 
can we determine the meaning of what He has said? Also, how will 
we actualize the biblical message and translate it in such a way 
that it becomes contemporary while faithfully proclaiming the gos-
pel once for all delivered? How does one distinguish between the 
proper sense of Scripture and the different ways in which it may 
be applied? Is there a literal sense and a mystical one? Which 
considerations should guide us in the interpretation of prophecy? 
How can we understand the biblical view of time and event and dis-
cern how past and present and future are related?

--- Page 13 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 3 
These questions--and many more--point to the extraordinary 
importance of the hermeneutical question. Indeed, the history of 
the church can be seen as an ongoing effort to interpret God's 
Word and make the gospel meaningful to contemporary man. Our gen-
eration is no exception. 
Hermeneutic and Its Presuppositions  
At this point we find ourselves in a dilemma arising from the 
nature of the matter. To set our rules of interpretation means 
asking the question: What are the methods of interpretation that 
are best fitted to the whole of the biblical message? In fact, we 
must already understand this message as a whole before we can set 
our rules for interpreting the single texts. In other words, the 
interpreter's understanding of the whole message of Scripture and 
his view of the nature and authority of the Bible largely determine 
his hermeneutical methods. Does not this approach show a lack of 
objectivity? In any discipline, I believe, the student without 
any presuppositions is essentially an abstraction who never existed 
in the past, does not exist in the present, and from all we know 
of human beings will not exist in the future. When one attempts 
to deal with such questions as are raised in the effort of inter-
preting the Bible, he approaches them from the viewpoint of a par-
ticular heritage. 
Roman Catholics, identifying the church with its Lord, there-
fore declare that what the Bible says and means cannot be discov-
ered outside the declarations of the teaching office of the church. 
With equal earnestness, other Christians, taking the Scriptures as 
evidence of the historical evolution of religion from a primitive 
religiosity up to Jesus, have emphasized the ethical side of Chris-
tianity. Here relations with the Bible remain fundamentally loose 
or indeed "free," since one is not to be bound by the letter of 
the Bible. The neo-orthodox is likewise devoted to basic assump-
tions, which control his study of Scripture. It is not therefore 
a peculiarity of Adventist interpreters that they are guided in 
their study of the Bible by what they think of it. Presuppositions 
there must be, and presuppositions there are. But ideally, the 
basic difference between our presuppositions and those of many 
other groups is that those of the Adventist are provided by the 
Scripture itself, whereas I fear many of those of the other groups 
are not. 
The basic presupposition of Adventist believers--which they 
share with evangelicals in general--is that the Bible as God's 
Word demands an approach set in reverence and faith. From within 
Scripture itself we meet more than once with the assertion that

--- Page 14 ---
4 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
faith is essential to understanding. This attitude does not imply 
any preconceived notion of what the Bible ought to contain but 
merely anticipates that the object investigated will be given a 
chance to speak for itself, that the Book will be studied for what 
it has to say. And what it does say is that it is God's testimony 
to man, the revealed Word of God. 
This fact leads us to two basic questions that will occupy 
our attention in the remainder of this chapter. First, in which 
way did the revelation come to the authors of the various books 
of the Bible? Second, what can we say regarding its inspiration? 
Both questions are at the very heart of the current theological 
debate. 
Revelation, Proposition or Encounter? 
From its beginnings Christianity has considered itself to be 
a revealed religion. And divine revelation was formally defined 
as the supernatural communication of truths in propositional form. 
Until the modern period everyone from scholastics to deists, from 
pietists to rationalists, operated on the basis that the content 
of revelation is knowledge about or from God in the form of prop-
ositions; that is to say, of statements that affirm truths neces-
sary for salvation. Revelation was regarded as the imparting of 
knowledge or information. This propositional concept of revela-
tion has been challenged by contemporary theology, which in so 
doing has introduced a startling new chapter in the history of the 
interpretation of revelation. Drawing upon the "I-Thou" concept 
as a central category in its exposition of the Christian faith, 
encounter theology seeks to elaborate the understanding of revela-
tion as lying beyond the "information barrier." Revelation is 
understood to be the personal self-disclosure of God to man, not 
the impartation of truths about God. It is an "I-Thou" encounter 
with God, the full presence of God in the consciousness of the 
believer. Its content is not some thing about God, but some one, 
God Himself, addressing the soul and calling for a response. 
Encounter theologians do not think they are advocating some-
thing new, but rather that they are promoting a return to pristine 
Christianity. The biblical view, they say, is "truth as encounter" 
over against "truth as proposition." From this point of view, of 
course, the Bible is no longer revelation nor God's revealed Word, 
but a witness to revelation. Its content is merely the result of 
later rational reflection by its authors upon God's self-manifes-
tation. Its function is not to pass on doctrinal information that 
only God knows but to bear witness to and provide a promise of 
revelation. It points beyond itself to an event to which it bears

--- Page 15 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 5 
witness and which is not the Bible itself but God's personal dis-
closure or revelation to the individual Christian soul. 
Word, Event, and Meaning.  
Does revelation consist of facts, truths, or knowledge? The 
issue is sensitive indeed. It is crucial for many aspects of the 
Christian gospel, and it has important implications for one's 
hermeneutics of Scripture. God, to be sure, is not Someone we 
find by our own efforts. In order for man to come to any true 
understanding of Him, he needs a revelation from above. Such a 
revelation of God exists. And it is described in Scripture as 
taking place and unfolding within history. What characterizes the 
OT revelation is that God has freely chosen to enter into a per-
sonal relationship with man, and that history is understood as the 
medium within which He reveals Himself. Thence, the Jewish faith 
in a self-revealing God focuses its attention on particular local-
ities and periods--on Creation and the Flood, Abraham and Jacob, 
the Exodus from Egypt, and a covenant made at Mount Sinai. These 
events, of course, remain accessible to every man's natural percep-
tion, and although acts of God, they may be explained away by the 
analogy of history. As divine acts, however, they are full of 
theological meaning. Therefore, by His grace God does reveal 
their meaning. The "word of the Lord" that raises Creation out 
of nothingness (see Gn 1; Ps 33:6, 9) is also the divine discourse 
of truth. It is salvific event and interpretation. The Word of 
God brings to pass salvation-history events; it also interprets 
their meaning, taking from them the anonymity of meaningless 
strokes of fate. 
The prophetic ministry, therefore, is the other form of his-
torical revelation. What distinguishes the biblical prophet is 
the fact that he has been the object of a privileged experience. 
He is the man in whom the word of the Lord resides, in whose mouth 
it has been placed or has come (see Jer 1:9; 5:13, 14). He is the 
man of the word (see Jer 18:18). 
Without ceasing to be a living word, the prophetic word in 
time becomes more and more a written word, and the prophet's mes-
sage written on a scroll will have the fixed character of a divine 
decree. Ezekiel, for instance, is the minister of an irrevocable 
word, which announces events and makes their accomplishment infal-
lible (see Eze 12:25-28; 24:14). The word of the Lord is no longer 
exclusively an event but also a message; even more, a command. It 
is not enough to hear the word; it must be obeyed. Better, it 
must be lived (see Eze 33:30-33). According to whether divine rev-
elation is accepted or refused, it becomes for man grace or judg-

--- Page 16 ---
6 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
ment, life or death (see Is 1:20; Jos 1:7, 8). Revelation undoubt-
edly is the revelation of someone, but it also aims at addressing 
all men, asking them questions, and making them partners in God's 
plan with a view to their salvation. 
Christ the Revelation, Event and Meaning  
In contradistinction to the cyclic conception of time, the OT 
revelation announced that the continuous succession of temporal 
events embracing past, present, and future was unfolding toward a 
goal. And in fact history as a personal dialogue between God and 
man reached a definitive peak in the incarnation of the Son of God. 
Christ, the incarnate Son, did not simply bring another revelation. 
He is the revelation, God revealing and revealed. It does not fol-
low, however, that revelation is identified only with the event of 
the Incarnation. Its meaning, as in olden times, needed to be de-
clared. Thus, it is through the words of Christ addressed to us 
in explanation that the event and meaning of the Incarnation as 
divine self-revelation is unveiled for us. Here again, as in OT 
times, the Word of God made Himself known in two related ways: In 
meaningful events that were parts of the unfolding of salvation 
history and in words that made the meaning of these events explicit. 
At the same time, however, the apostles occupy a unique place 
in the process of divine revelation. Their role is unrepeatable. 
Having experienced in their lifetime the Man who was God in person, 
they were commissioned to represent Him among their fellows. They 
were to be His witnesses (see Acts 10:41)--witnesses first of all 
to the Risen One (see Acts 26:16), but in fact to everything they 
'had seen and heard of Christ (see Acts 4:20); witnesses to the 
whole of Christ's person and work, event and interpretation. This 
proclamation of God's message would have been impossible without 
the mediation of objective propositional statements and judgmental 
formulations. And it is the apostles' consensus that this develop-
ment took place under the movement of the Spirit (see Eph 3:5; 
Acts 4:8, 31, 33). 
As the Lord tarried, a time came when the need for a written 
testimony became increasingly obvious. What had taken place in 
the Incarnation and was being proclaimed by the apostles was never 
to be surpassed. But neither was it to cease, because it had hap-
pened for all men until the end of time. Thus, in order to help 
coming generations of Christians sift authentic truth about Christ 
from the spurious, and above all to ensure that the revelational 
experience in Christ would be continued, a written deposit of the 
apostolic testimony was developed. Their written word--like their 
preaching--although not identical to the divine Word Himself, is

--- Page 17 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 7 
the only reliable source of firsthand witnessing concerning the 
Person through whom God revealed the saving knowledge of Himself 
to the world. As in the days of the prophets and the apostles, 
today's believers are those who have come to "believe . . . through 
their word" (Jn 17:20). 
A False Dichotomy  
It is not difficult to see what contemporary writers on revel-
ation are dissatisfied with. They are opposed to revelation de-
fined in terms of a certain number of truths to be believed. They 
tend, for that reason, to set revelation-encounter over against 
revelation-doctrine. But the disjunction between the God who acts 
or meets and the God who speaks is not so obvious to me, at least 
on biblical grounds. It is true that the understanding of revela-
tion developed in this chapter may be characterized as an intellec-
tual and rational concept. And it must be admitted that more than 
once we Adventists have indeed given the impression that revelation 
is identical with a set of divinely authenticated truths. Revela-
tion has tended to be thought of as correct doctrine. But I wonder 
whether this rightly describes what we really believe. On the 
basis of scriptural data I conceive of revelation as primarily the 
self-disclosure of God Himself giving man a brief glimpse of the 
mystery of His being and love. But I do not wish either to dispute 
or deny that it makes sense to speak of the content or the truths 
of revelation. God's sovereign activity in history does not be-
come intelligible as revelation unless it is accompanied by the 
Word that expresses its meaning. 
Faith, man's answer to God's self-disclosure, is directed to-
ward a Person. It is first a personal response to the revealed 
intentions of a personal Being. It is acknowledgment before being 
knowledge, "belief in" before "belief that," although both aspects, 
in each instance, are indissolubly linked to one another, and dif-
ficult to distinguish. Thus the fourth Gospel exhorts us to be-
lieve in Christ (see Jn 1:12; 10:26), receive Christ (see Jn 5:43), 
come to Christ (see Jn 6:35, 37, 44, 65), abide in Christ (see Jn 
(see Jn 15:4, 7), receive His Word (see Jn 12:48; 17:8), receive 
His testimony (see Jn 3:11), and abide in His Word (see Jn 8:31). 
Thus, faith in Christ is at the same time adhering to Him and to 
His Word, receiving Him and believing everything His envoys say 
(see Jn 5:43; 20:31), for like the person of Christ His Word is 
life and truth. 
As a student of Scripture I must underline that revelation is 
an event, an encounter. But one's encounter with Christ is effec-

--- Page 18 ---
8 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
ted only through hearing the prophetic and apostolic proclamation 
consigned to Scriptures. These fragile words of Scripture passed 
down to us from the OT and the NT writers are intrinsic to the 
revelational process. They are as true as the Christ event they 
explicate, and they share in the "once-for-all" character of the 
divine revelation. This explains why the apostles, as the prophets 
of old, expected those who received their message to recognize it 
as authoritative, as "the word of God," "the commandments of the 
Lord" (1 Th 2:13; 1 Cor 14:37; see 2 Th 3:14). It is this apos-
tolic doctrine--or truth--entrusted to him as a deposit that Paul, 
for instance, wants to see preserved (see 1 Ti 4:6; 2 Ti 1:13, 14). 
It is evident by now that encounter theology does not go far 
enough in its understanding of the role of propositional elements 
in revelation. True doctrine as expressed in Scripture, far from 
being potentially detrimental, is, in fact, indispensable for a 
vital relationship with Jesus Christ. It is the instrument through 
which God works in human life. The words of Scripture are not 
merely a record of or a witness to a prior revelatory event; they 
are intrinsic to the revelational process and contribute to its 
constitution. It should be obvious, therefore, that if the text 
of Scripture is to be revelatory of God it will be approached by 
the Christian in an attitude of total trust in all it teaches. 
The conviction that the Bible is God's written Word, having its 
origin in divine acting and speaking, can but deeply affect our 
entire hermeneutical approach. 
What About Inspiration? 
The pattern of divine revelation makes it possible to address 
ourselves briefly now to the issue of inspiration, another tenet 
of historic Christianity also challenged by modern thought. The 
issue is quite clear: Once God had revealed Himself to His ser-
vants the prophets, as we noticed, did He exercise any determining 
influence on the writers of the OT and NT in order that they might 
proclaim and set down in an exact and trustworthy way the message 
they had received from Him? Or were the Scriptures written by men 
who wrestled with the problem of interpreting God's self-disclosure 
to their inner souls in terms relevant to the concrete historical 
situation of their own day? 
For hundreds of years, in fact until approximately the begin-
ning of the nineteenth century, Scripture was traditionally under-
stood as a divine communication to man cast in written form under 
the express inflow of the Holy Spirit. The whole picture has 
changed considerably during the past hundred years. This turn of 
events is due mainly to the rise of modern scientific literary and

--- Page 19 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 9 
historical criticism and its application to the Bible. Until then 
it was generally believed that the Bible was a unique book, written 
down by human writers at the dictation of the Holy Spirit, which 
gave it an unquestionable normative value. 
The Age of Enlightenment  
The age of enlightenment questioned all things, including the 
idea of a divinely dictated body of inspired writings. By the be-
ginning of the nineteenth century it began to insist that there 
was no essential difference between the Bible and any other liter-
ary production. It said that far from being unique, the Bible 
ought to be interpreted by the same critical-grammatical and his-
torical methods as any other book. 
A genuine interest in resurrecting the past had brought about 
progressive refinement of historical criticism, of methods of his-
torical research. This effort eventually had also reached the two 
testaments. Although not in itself directed against the Christian 
church, this perfectly legitimate undertaking-developed independ-
ently of the church, with its own methods and with no intention of 
serving the church. 
It was shortly taken up by thinkers who joined to it a philo-
sophical criticism completely detached from the Christian faith, 
in the name of which they presumed to stand in sovereign judgment 
over the content of the Bible and sometimes over religion itself. 
Opposed in principle to the very idea of revelation and inspiration 
in the biblical sense, rationalist philosophy took over literary 
analysis, historical criticism, and the conclusions of both soci-
ology and the history of religion. It made them instruments in 
its attacks on all forms of Christian dogmatism. 
The theories thus constructed claimed to be independent of any 
preconception and of any faith. In fact, however, tacitly admitted 
before any investigation, is the principle that the values appear-
ing in the course of one's study of the biblical documents were 
the products of purely human factors, neither more nor less trans-
cendent than any other religious society. The Bible is merely the 
record of man's growing experience of God and man's progressive 
response to God. As such, it is a religious book of inestimable 
value but devoid of the supernatural dimension that faith acknowl-
edges in it. 
The influence this view exercised and continues to exercise 
on the biblical hermeneutic of not a few of our contemporaries is 
well known.

--- Page 20 ---
10 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Assets and Liabilities 
This new attitude toward the Scriptures brought about by the 
application to them of the methods of literary and historical 
criticism has provided us with a flood of light on our "background" 
knowledge of the Bible. We are much better informed today than 
before on the period in which the various books of the Bible were 
written, the kind of men they were written by, the particular prob-
lems the writers faced, and the historical conditions under which 
they lived. But its tendency to regard the Bible as only one 
record among others of the evolving human religious consdiousness 
has been carried too far. No longer, goes the argument, does 
modern scientific study of the Bible support the theory that the 
Scripture came by way of visions and voices or that the prophets 
and apostolic writers reached their message by the passive accept-
ance of words dictated while their rational and critical faculties 
were asleep. The inspiration of the Bible is not different in kind 
from that of other religious writings but only in degree. 
The Existentialist Approach  
Many, in fact, accept the same postulates, even when they 
attempt to avoid their consequences through their existentialist 
interpretation of the biblical record. Thus has it frequently 
been said that when we speak of the inspiration of Scripture we 
ought to speak no longer in terms of a composition taking place 
under the constant direction and inflow of the Holy Spirit, but 
we ought primarily to mean that men who were progressively deepen-
ing their experience of God and had come to call Him holy, right-
eous, and Father wrote the Scriptures. These men actually were 
engaged in thinking out the given problems of a concrete situation 
in the light of certain historical happenings and experiences that, 
through the inward illumination of the Spirit of God, had brought 
to them a new understanding of man's nature and destiny. Their 
experience was not different from that of Christian teachers in 
subsequent ages, including many Christians in our own time. The 
biblical writers possessed no supernatural faculty of knowing 
divine truth and enjoyed no experiences different from those of 
Christians of later generations. Nor need their writings any 
longer be regarded as produced in any manner generically different 
from that which gave birth to the wide range of Christian litera-
ture produced since the days of Christ. The latter can appropri-
ately be described as inspired by the Holy Spirit in precisely the 
same formal sense as were the books of the Bible.

--- Page 21 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 11 
The Testimony of Scripture  
This modern approach to the issue of inspiration, which devel-
oped out of an ongoing dialogue between philosophy and theology, 
has been so preoccupied with the study of the Bible as a human 
document that it has been unable to show convincingly that it is 
also God's Word. It is, to be true, on biblical grounds that the 
Christian Church has traditionally attributed to all the books 
composing the Bible the special character of being inspired. Here 
the Bible is presented as the Word of God addressed to men, the 
Word in writing. This idea in any case is contained in the vari-
ous expressions used by the biblical writers to describe the min-
istry of the prophets and their particular endowment. Or could it 
be that in these days we should not accept the testimony of Scrip-
ture regarding itself? Yet to refuse its testimony is really to 
be unscientific, for the first requisite of science is to take 
each thing for what it is, and not for another thing. This means 
within the limits of our discussion, to make the attempt at least 
to accept the Bible at its own evaluation and with its own presup-
positions. I wonder whether in the end that process does not make 
more sense than any alternative method. 
What, then, is the biblical testimony on this particular 
point? If one listens to what the Scriptures have to say he soon 
will discover that the people of the OT believed that God guided 
them in a miraculous and supernatural way. They believed that the 
great figures who shaped their heritage--Abraham, Moses, and the 
prophets--acted and spoke under the Spirit. Abraham was God's 
friend (see Is 41:8); God appeared to him at Mamre (see Gn 18:1). 
Moses received the revelation of God's name (see Ex 3:1-15), and 
God spoke to him face to face (see Num 12:4-8). The Spirit of the 
Lord came upon His prophet (see Is 61:1) and His word was upon His 
servant's tongue (see 2 Sa 23:2). Surely, adds Amos, the Lord 
"does nothing, without revealing his secret to his servants the 
prophets" (Amos 3:7, RSV). God's Spirit moved men to speak, not 
necessarily to write, though we must recognize that very early in 
Israel's life much must have been written (see Ex 17:14; Jos 1:6-8; 
24:26). No wonder Judaism came to believe that the books of the 
OT were from God, inspired by His Spirit. 
This belief also became part of the Christian faith, as indi-
cated by the NT, which continually cites the OT and affirms its 
divine origin. "It is written" is a typical way in which Jesus 
referred to the OT (see Mt 4:4, 7, 10; 11:10; 26:24), as do Paul 
(e.g. Rom 9:13) and Peter (1 Pe 1:16). It was really God who 
spoke through David (see Acts 4:25), and "'the Holy Spirit was 
right in saying to your fathers through Isaiah the prophet . . .'" 
(Acts 28:25, RSV). The text of the Scriptures was so habitually

--- Page 22 ---
12 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
identified with the utterances of God that it had become natural 
sometimes to interchange the terms God and Scripture: "And the 
scripture . . . preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham . . ." 
(Gal 3:8, RSV; cf. Gn 12:3); "as God said . . ." (2 Cor 6:16, RSV; 
cf. Ex 25:8; see Heb 1:5-7; cf. Ps 2:7, 2 Sa 7:14). So long as 
the words are in the OT they are attributed to God, the Holy Spirit, 
or Scripture without distinction. Peter sums it up by declaring 
that "men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from God" (2 Pe 1:21, RSV), 
Paul asserts that "all scripture is inspired by God" (2 Ti 3:16, 
RSV). These "oracles of God" (Rom 3:2) call for man's response, 
that is to say, faith. For if God speaks man listens. 
Non-Christians certainly may choose to hold that the exper-
ience the biblical writers had was falsely interpreted by them, 
that some other interpretation is more plausible. But at least 
this was how the experience appeared to the men who underwent it, 
and who, after all, were in a much better position to estimate its 
significance than those who never had it. 
By Way of Conclusion  
The Bible is a book, a document. This book is the Word of 
God because men spoke and wrote from an impulse that came from God. 
Does that fact indicate that in our attempt to understand and to 
interpret it no human method of studying documents is relevant to 
it? Not in the least. 
God is the author of the Bible, but in terms of its composi-
tion it is a collection of human writings. It actually was writ-
ten by men not suspended between heaven and earth but firmly 
established on this earth, men of a definite race, born on a defi-
nite date, following a definite occupation. The Bible is involved 
in the flux of human events. It is part of history. It also has 
its geography. This being so, there is in the Bible--considered 
as a human document--an area in which philologists, historians, 
and archeologists, for instance, may freely practise their compe-
tencies. For a personal study of these matters we need methods 
and guidelines, a hermeneutic that will help us toward a correct 
understanding of the biblical text. 
But we need more than that. It is always possible to treat 
the Scriptures as an ordinary document and to regard the history 
of Israel as a history like any other. In one sense this is 
legitimate, and in this way we can obtain real knowledge about 
Israel, valid at its own level and in its own order. But both 
that level and order are inadequate to explain what God really 
effected in Israel and expressed in the Bible.

--- Page 23 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 13 
There is another approach, proceeding from our inner resources, 
that might be summed up as "seeking God"--if it were not for the 
fact that He sought us first. We need divine illumination, the 
interior grace that moves man to give his free assent to the ex-
ternal Word that confronts him. A grace that invites belief, 
moves to faith, and makes us eager to find God, to obey Him and 
to be faithful to Him. This is a light not from below but from 
above, which enables us to read the Bible with fresh and ever 
deeper understanding, precisely because it has been received as 
the revealed and inspired Word. 
When we approach the Bible in this way, with the inner re-
sources of a profound Christian awareness, its text seems to be 
lighted from within. The Word of God no longer confronts me as 
external to myself, as an object to be analyzed and dissected. 
It is a living arrow that pierces my heart, a sharp sword that 
penetrates to the joints and the marrow (see Heb 4:12). The Word 
of God ceases to be an object, a thing. I see it as something 
alive. In and through the Word, God addresses me personally, not 
simply as an echo of the past but as a Word speaking now. I find 
words in the Bible I no longer simply read but that speak to me, 
introducing me to the crucial drama of life, the conflict between 
truth and falsehood, life and death, and communicate the message 
that God redeems those who trust in His mercy. 
These two levels in the reading of the Bible are not contra-
dictory. The ideal would be to assemble into a unity our knowl-
edge of the biblical environment, a good translation, an explana-
tion of the literary forms and human contexts in which the books 
were written, and ensure reverential and receptive reading. And, 
if possible, to check one stage by another. 
From what we have seen it can be said that in the proper 
Christian sense of the term revelation is the decisive and first 
event of Christianity. In biblical interpretation anything de-
pends on revelation, and everything goes back to it. At the same 
time, the meaning of inspiration for me is that I recognize that 
God's revealed message has been sent to the world with my name 
and address on it. It all means that God's Word claims me, my 
faith, my trust, and my obedience. In the midst of the many 
voices that solicit my allegiance today, such an understanding of 
revelation and inspiration can but have a determining influence 
on my biblical hermeneutic, on the basic principles I shall follow 
in interpreting and rediscovering the Word of God.

--- Page 24 ---
14 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
READING LIST  
Baillie, John. The Idea of Revelation in Recent Thought. New 
York: Columbia University, 1956. 
An incisive study of key questions in the contemporary 
discussion of revelation and the Bible. 
Hatt, Harold E. Encountering Truth. Nashville: Abingdon, 1966. 
A helpful evaluation of the concept of revelation from 
the viewpoint of both encounter and propositional theology. 
The author's synthesis includes elements of both. 
Henry, Carl F. H., ed. Revelation and the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Baker, 1958. 
Twenty-four international scholars express contemporary 
evangelical thinking on the major issues of revelation, in-
spiration, and the authority of Scriptures. 
Hordern, William. A Layman's Guide to Protestant Theology. Rev. 
ed., New York: Macmillan, 1968. 
Like every other science, theology has its own technical 
terminology, its jargon. This volume interprets contemporary 
theology for the nontechnical reader in terms that he can 
understand. One of the best of its kind. 
Latourelle, Rene. Theology of Revelation. Staten Island: Alba 
House, 1967. 
A major book, by a Roman Catholic theologian, on the 
notion of revelation in the Scriptures, the writings of the 
church fathers, and the Catholic theological tradition. 
Moran, Gabriel. Theology of Revelation. New York: Herder and 
Herder, 1966. 
A provocative effort from a Roman Catholic viewpoint to 
provide Christians with an adequate understanding of the 
nature of revelation. 
Pache, Rene. The Inspiration and Authority of Scripture. Chicago: 
Moody Press, 1969. 
A refreshing reaffirmation of the authenticity and super-
natural authority of the Bible. Its major part is devoted to 
the issues of inspiration and authority. 
Pinnock, Clark H. Biblical Revelation. Chicago: Moody Press, 
1971 
In a straightforward style a young evangelical theologian 
aims to expose the very foundations of theology and to con-

--- Page 25 ---
Revelation, Inspiration, and Hermeneutics 	 15 
sider the doctrine of biblical inspiration in the light of 
the contemporary discussion. 
Ramm, Bernard. Special Revelation and the Word of God. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1961. 
A valuable study by a Protestant conservative concerned 
with the contemporary problem of special revelation over 
against general revelation. Fresh, stimulating, and practical. 
. The Pattern of Religious Authority. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1968. 
A remarkable attempt to offer to the Christian public an 
introduction to the difficult and important problem of relig-
ious authority. A model of conciseness and clarity.

--- Page 26 ---
Dean of the Seventh-day Adventist 
Theological Seminary, Dr. Siegfried H. 
Horn is also chairman of the department 
of Old Testament and professor of ar-
chaeology and history of antiquity. 
He has been on the faculty since 1951. 
His dissertation for the Ph.D. degree, 
also in 1951, from the University of 
Chicago was entitled: "The Relations 
Between Egypt and Asia During the 
Egyptian Middle Kingdom." Dr. Horn 
has made 18 expeditions to the Middle 
East, his most recent being the third 
excavation at Heshbon during the sum-
mer of 1973.

--- Page 27 ---
PART 	 II 
HISTORY OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION 
2. Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age  
SIEGFRIED H. HORN 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
All people who believe that the Bible is God's Word and a 
norm according to which they must regulate their lives are forced 
to interpret its teachings, precepts, and laws. We need interpre-
tation because the books of the Bible were written many centuries 
ago by and for people who lived in cultural and environmental sit-
uations and spoke languages different from ours. Although the 
Jews of the apostolic age lived much closer in time to the writers 
of the OT than we do, their circumstances differed sufficiently 
from those existing several centuries earlier that they needed to 
interpret the OT precepts and teachings in a manner relevant to 
their time and situation. This was not done uniformly by all 
classes of Jews because of the variety of their educational and 
cultural backgrounds, surroundings, and outlooks. Jews living in 
the Hellenistic world outside Palestine interpreted the Scriptures 
differently from the way those who lived in their homeland did; 
and Jews who belonged to strict sects such as the Pharisees or 
Essenes regarded their Scriptures differently from the way their 
more liberal compatriots regarded them, of whom the Sadducees are 
good examples. 
The Sources  
We are well acquainted with the methods of interpretation as 
practised by orthodox Jews, mainly the Pharisees. Their written 
interpretation of the Pentateuch has survived in the Talmud. Some

--- Page 28 ---
18 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
parts of the Talmud can be traced back to the 2d century B.C. 
They were handed down orally and augmented from generation to gen-
eration as the needs arose until the end of the 2d century A.D., 
when Johanan Ha-Nasi wrote them down. This monumental work, con-
sisting of sixty-three tracts, became known as the Mishnah, or 
Second Law. In the course of time the Mishnah itself became the 
subject of a written interpretation, the Gemara, and these two 
works combined are generally known as the Talmud. The Talmud, 
next to the OT, has formed the authoritative rule of life for all 
orthodox Jews to the present day. On the other hand, any works 
of an interpretative nature produced by liberal-minded Jews of 
apostolic times, such as the Sadducees, are lost. The destruction 
of the Jerusalem Temple and the cessation of priestly functions 
caused the Sadducees, who were largely Temple personnel, to lose 
their influence, identity, even their existence, and whatever 
literary works they may have produced. 
Of the religious works of Jews living in the diaspora, the 
works of Philo of Alexandria (c. 20 B.C.-A.D. 50) have survived 
as examples of their interpretation of Scripture. They give us 
an excellent insight into the methods of biblical interpretation 
employed by Jews who lived far from their homeland. These writ-
ings show how strongly their interpretation of Scripture was 
influenced by the allegorizational and philosophical methods em-
ployed in the Hellenistic world. 
Thanks to the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls at Qumran, 
we have some religious works, including commentaries of biblical 
books, from the Essenes of Christ's day. The Qumran scrolls are 
the remains of the literature of a strict monastic Jewish sect 
that used the Scriptures as a basis of and justification for its 
existence and its teachings, rules, and expectations. 
Interpretation of Scripture by Orthodox Jews  
During the age when the NT came into being the Jewish tradi-
tion, concerned chiefly with exegesis of the Scriptures, flourished 
in an oral manner. It used the biblical text to find inspiration 
and direction for daily applications. The Jewish rabbis distin-
guished between peshat, the "clear" (literally, naked or undressed), 
unambiguous meaning of a Bible passage, which needed no interpre-
tation, and the deritsh, the "searched" meaning of a scriptural 
passage. From this word was obtained the noun midrash, "exegesis." 
The exegesis dealing with historical or dogmatic subjects was 
called haggadic Midrash--haggadah meaning "expression"--indicating 
that this sort of exegesis made a biblical passage more understand-
able. Here theological and inspirational thoughts are of primary

--- Page 29 ---
Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age 	 19 
importance,•and they are often conveyed by the use of imaginative 
stories and legends. On the other hand, exegesis dealing with 
legal matters was called halakic Midrash, since halakah has the 
meaning "advance." Thus the halakic Midrash provides advanced, 
or up-to-date, legal information based on the biblical laws. 
Before looking further into Jewish interpretation it should 
be pointed out that a certain amount of scriptural information does 
not need any learned interpretation and can be applied as given. 
This fact was recognized by the rabbis and was stressed in their 
writings (Chullin 6a). On the other hand, there were many situa-
tions in life that were not covered by clear biblical statements. 
Hence rules of interpretation were needed to find scriptural guid-
ance for all kinds of situations in life as well as support for 
popular ideas and teachings. 
In many cases interpretative conclusions were drawn from texts 
that went far beyond the actual scriptural statements. An example 
is Gn 26:5, which simply states that Abraham "obeyed my [God's] 
voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my 
laws." The official Jewish interpretation of this passage was 
that Abraham had known and kept the law of God in its totality as 
the Jews knew it in the days of Christ. This meant that he was 
acquainted with all regulations regarding ceremonies of cult, sac-
rifices, washings, and civil and moral issues, whether or not they 
were contained in the Decalogue, in the other laws of Moses, or 
even in the oral law, which the NT calls "Tradition" (Qiddushim 
IV.14). 
In some cases an allegorizing interpretation was given to 
scriptural passages if they contained expressions that were con-
sidered to be either offensive or trivial. The Mosaic law, for 
example, permitted an officer to excuse a man from serving in the 
armed forces if he was "fearful and fainthearted" (Dt 20:8), so 
that he would not undermine the martial spirit of his comrades. 
The Jewish political and religious leaders of the Maccabean and 
later ages evidently found this regulation unacceptable, and thus 
interpreted it to apply only to men who feared death because of 
certain grave sins they had committed and for which they had not 
yet found forgiveness (Sota VIII.5). 
Sometimes a play on words was applied to texts, resulting in 
a more colorful meaning than was obvious in the original. In this 
way the passage of 1 Sa 2:2, "[there is no] rock like our God," 
was interpreted to mean that there was no "fashioner" (or "crea-
tor") like the God of the Jews, for the Hebrew word pr, "rock," 
sounded similar to the word sayyar, which has the meaning "fash-
ioner," etc. (Nekhilta on Ex 15:11).

--- Page 30 ---
20 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
How far from literal interpretation the Jews went in their 
search for proof texts to support certain beliefs shows in their 
use of Amos 9:6, where the statement is made that God "builds his 
upper chambers in the heavens, and founds his vault upon the earth" 
(RSV). Because it was held that God's presence is always accom-
panied by His Shekinah, a Jewish term meaning "divine glory," the 
Shekinah was said to be present wherever three men sit together 
studying the Torah. The number three in this interpretation is 
obtained from the number of consonants that make up the Hebrew 
word earth, n'eree (Aboth 111.2). 
The later Jewish writings attributed to Hillel, the great 
sage and Pharisee of Christ's time (died ca. A.D. 9), outlined 
seven hermeneutic rules, which will be explained by examples so 
that one can see how the Scriptures were understood and taught by 
orthodox Jews in the apostolic and succeeding ages. Later, in the 
early second century A.D., Rabbi Ishmael ben Elisha increased 
Hillel's seven rules to 13. They were applied by orthodox Jews 
throughout their later history. Although it is not absolutely 
certain that all seven rules of interpretation attributed to Hillel 
were actually promulgated by that famous rabbi and thus applied in 
the time of Christ's ministry, some of them can be traced to that 
time. We will list them here with some examples of application to 
show the reasoning of Jewish religious thinking in Christ's time. 
1. Inference From Lighter to Heavier Meaning (qal wakmer).  
This means that any rule applicable to an item of inferior quality 
must be applied much more strictly to a superior item. To give an 
example: Because the weekly Sabbath was considered to be more im-
portant than other festival days, a restriction made with regard 
to an annual festival was considered to be much more applicable 
to the Sabbath (Baba Kamma 11.5). 
This rule was even further extended, as the following example 
shows: Ex 23:19 forbids boiling a kid in its mother's milk. But 
this prohibition was enlarged to apply to the boiling of any kind 
of meat in any kind of milk, and finally came to mean that the com-
bined use of any meat and milk products during any meal was counter 
to the law (Chullin 115b). This regulation is the well-known basis 
for one of the kosher laws of orthodox Jews. 
2. Analogy of Expressions (gezirah shawah).  This expression 
was used to indicate that a certain ambiguous passage of Scripture 
can be explained by another passage in which the same expression 
occurs in a clearly understood way. Lev 16:29, for example, re-
quiring that Jews "afflict ['anah] your souls" on the Day of Atone-
ment, does not define the nature of their affliction. However, in 
Dt 8:3 the verb 'anah ("to suffer, afflict") is used in connection

--- Page 31 ---
Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age 	 21 
with hunger, for which reason the rabbis interpreted Lev 16:29 to 
mean that the Jews had to abstain from food on the Day of Atone-
ment. 
Another somewhat ambiguous passage is Ex 21:2, where the ex-
pression 'shed 'ibri can be rendered "Hebrew slave" (RSV), meaning 
either that the slave was a Hebrew or "the slave of a Hebrew man," 
not indicating the nationality of the slave. On the other hand, 
the parallel passage of Dt 15:12 is clear in this respect by call-
ing the slave your Hebrew brother. Hence, the first-mentioned 
translation of Ex 21:2, "Hebrew slave," must be applied, according 
to the rabbis. 
3. Application by Analogy With One Provision (binyan 'ab  
maktob 'el:lad).  According to this rule, texts were applied to cases 
that were not expressly mentioned in the texts, although they dealt 
with situations of a similar nature. The result was that in some 
cases where this interpretation was applied the text was used as 
basis for reasoning not mentioned in the text. For example, in 
Dt 19, among other things, regulations are given with regard to a 
man who accidentally killed his fellow worker in a forest while 
both were engaged in cutting down trees. The killer was conse-
quently allowed to flee to a City of Refuge, where he could not be 
apprehended by the avenger of the dead man, if it was proven that 
he had not intentionally killed his friend. 
The rabbis explained that this judgment can be similarly 
applied to any accidental death resulting when two men were build-
ing a wall or doing other work in a public place (as the forest 
mentioned in the text was public domain). This, then, means also 
by analogy, according to the rabbis, that an accidental death oc-
curring on the killer's private property is not punishable, because 
the dead person presumably had no business being on that property 
when his accidental death occurred (Maccoth 11.3). 
4. Application by Analogy With Two Provisions (binyan 'ab  
mishne ketitbim).  This rule of exegesis is closely related to the 
previous rule except that the analogy is strengthened by some kind 
of near repetition. Ex 21:26, 27, for example, provides that a 
servant would gain his freedom if his master had destroyed one of 
his eyes or one of his teeth. In this case two provisions are 
made--one concerning the eye and another concerning the tooth. 
Although they are different in use, both eye and tooth are essen-
tial parts of the body that cannot be replaced if destroyed. The 
rule therefore was extended to all other parts of the body, thus 
explaining the force of the text as saying that if a man mutilates 
or destroys any member of his servant's body he must set him free 
as a consequence of that brutal treatment (Kiddushim 24a).

--- Page 32 ---
22 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
5. The Effect of General and Particular Terms (kalal weperet).  
This rule was actually used in two different ways, depending on 
whether a general term was followed by a specific designation, or 
whether a specific designation was followed by a general term. Two 
examples will make clear how the rabbis applied this rule. 
(a) Dt 22:11 (RSV) decrees that mingled stuff, namely wool 
and linen, should not be worn together. The general term "mingled 
stuff" was followed by the specific explanatory statement "wool 
and linen." This statement meant that it was this particular com-
bination that was prohibited. The explanatory statement therefore 
was considered to restrict the general term "mingled stuff" to 
only this specific mixture, and that any other combinations of 
fabric would be permissible (Khilayim X.1). 
(b) On the other hand, when specific terms were followed by a 
general term, the opposite rule of interpretation had to be given. 
An example is Ex 22:9, which states that if a man lends another man 
an ox, ass, sheep, garment, or any other thing, and the loaned 
thing is lost, double restitution must be made. Here the general-
izing term "any manner of lost thing" shows that ox, ass, sheep, 
and garment are to be taken only as examples and that therefore any 
borrowed thing, living or dead, if lost, must be refunded in double 
value (Mekhilta on Ex 22:9). 
6. Analogy Made From Another Passage (kayNe' bo mimeOm  
'ahar. This rule was similar to that of No. 2, already explained, 
as the following example will illustrate. The law provided that 
the Jews had to keep the Passover "at its appointed time" (Num 9:2, 
RSV). Hillel was asked whether this meant that the Passover lamb 
had to be killed even on a Sabbath if the 14th of Nisan, the Pass-
over eve, fell on a Sabbath day. He replied that the law expressly 
decreed that the "daily" sacrifices had to be offered also on the 
Sabbath (Num 28:10). Consequently, the expression "at its appoint-
ed time" means, by analogy, that the Passover lamb had to be slain 
on the 14th of Nisan, whether that day fell on a Sabbath day or on 
any other day of the week. 
7. The Explanation Obtained From the Context (tabar hilmad  
me'anin5').  This rule decreed that a passage should not be inter-
preted as an isolated statement, but only in the light of its con-
text. For example, the statement of Ex 16:29, "let no man go out 
of his place on the seventh day," taken out of its context could 
be interpreted to mean that no man was allowed to leave his home 
for any reason whatsoever on the Sabbath. However, a reading of 
the preceding and following passages clearly shows that this pro-
hibition applied to those gathering manna in the wilderness, say-
ing that the Israelites should not go out on the Sabbath day to

--- Page 33 ---
Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age 	 23 
look for manna, which they would not find anyway on that day 
(Erubin 51a). 
Philo's Interpretation of the Scriptures  
The Jewish rabbis in Palestine actively resisted the philo-
sophical and cultural influences of the Hellenistic world and did 
everything in their power to shield their people from these influ-
ences.. But the diaspora Jews, especially those living in cities 
that were centers of intellectual Hellenistic life, such as Alex-
andria, were strongly influenced by Greek philosophy, especially 
Stoicism and allegory. This is already noticeable in the Greek 
translation of the Bible, the Septuagint, produced in the third 
and second centuries B.C., which carefully tried to change gross 
anthropomorphic or anthropopathic statements about God into a 
language more acceptable to intellectuals influenced by Greek 
reasoning and thinking. For example, the statement made by God 
according to Gn 6:7, "It repenteth me that I have made them," is 
translated in the Septuagint, "I am angry that I have made them." 
According to the Greek thinking, gods could not be visualized as 
regretting their acts but could be angry about their products. 
The Greek philosophers used allegory to justify deeper and 
hidden meanings in the rather blunt and often bawdy stories about 
their gods that revealed human character traits, weaknesses, and 
passions. In some apocryphal and pseudepigraphic Jewish works 
these allegorizing methods of the Greeks are applied--mostly, how-
ever, in a rather timid and careful way--so that orthodox Jews 
would not be offended. 
However, Philo of Alexandria, a prolific Jewish writer and 
exegete, used allegory with great force. Many of his commentaries 
on biblical books have survived, and they provide a clear picture 
of his methods of interpretation in which allegory played a major 
role. The title of his commentary on the Pentateuch, "Allegorical 
Exposition of the Holy Book of the Law," speaks for itself. Here 
Philo explains that the trees of knowledge and life in paradise 
had not really existed but were rather symbols, just as the serpent 
who seduced Eve to sin was actually a symbol of lust (Leg. alleg. 
111.21). Philo stated that whenever a text presented difficulties, 
made no sense, contained contradictions, or was unworthy of Scrip-
ture, the literal meaning should be given up in favor of an alle-
gorical interpretation. He called this type of interpretation the 
"laws of allegory" (On Abraham, 68). Philo also rejected any idea 
of visualizing God in human form because doing so would lead to 
the conclusion that God was also subject to human passions--a 
monstrous idea (On the Sacrifices of Abel and Cain, 95).

--- Page 34 ---
24 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The result of this sort of interpretation was that very little 
of the biblical stories was retained as fact in Philo's commentar-
ies. Everything was spiritualized and allegorized in a philosophi-
cal language appealing to the educated intellectuals of the Hellen-
istic world. Philo more than any other non-Christian writer influ-
enced the Greek-speaking church fathers for centuries. It took 
the church a long time to rid itself of the allegorical interpre-
tation of Scripture inherited from Philo. 
The Qumran Sectarian Interpretation of Scripture  
Through the discoveries of the Qumran scrolls and the excava-
tion of the remains of the community center at Khirbet Qumran we 
have gained a rather good insight of a strict monastic Jewish sect 
of Christ's time. It is now almost universally admitted that this 
sect was the Essenes, described or referred to by Josephus, Philo, 
Strabo, and other ancient writers. We learn that these people 
were avid students of the Bible, of which many copies have come to 
light--although most of them in fragments--in the caves around Qum-
ran. Furthermore, a large number of extrabiblical books, mostly 
religious in nature, were found in the Qumran area. Several of 
these are commentaries on biblical books, mainly on those of a 
prophetic nature. Among them the commentary on Habakkuk from Cave 
1 is the best preserved, but also fragmentary copies of commentar-
ies on Isaiah, Hosea, Micah, Nahum, Zephaniah, and the Psalms from 
Caves 1 and 4 have thus far been published. 
These commentaries clearly reveal that the Essenes were an 
eschatological sect, convinced they were living in the last days 
of this world's history, with the expected Messianic age just 
around the corner. All predictive prophecies were applied to sit-
uations of their time, some referring to the general political 
conditions, others to the history of the sect. 
The commentaries usually quote a brief passage of one to three 
verses of the biblical text, called the dabar, "word," which is 
followed by the phrase "Its pesher is" (pesher meaning "interpre-
tation"). For this reason some scholars have suggested that the 
term Midrash pesher should be used for this sort of eschatological 
Jewish interpretation; although the majority of scholars simply 
call it Pesher. Even though it is difficult to recognize any her-
meneutical rules in the interpretation of Scripture in the Qumran 
literature, some scholars have attempted to list recognizable rules 
of interpretation used by the Essenes. 
The following examples are typical of interpretations used by 
the Essenes: the "righteous" of Hab 1:4 is the "Teacher of Right-

--- Page 35 ---
Jewish Interpretation in the Apostolic Age 	 25 
eousness," the founder of the sect, whose name is nowhere recorded 
in Qumran literature. His authoritative teachings are reflected 
in all the nonbiblical writings found at Qumran. He was perse-
cuted, perhaps even killed, by the "Wicked Priest" or "Man of Lies" 
--probably one person. This explanation is also recognized in the 
sect's interpretation of Hab 1:4, which says that "the wicked sur-
round the righteous" (RSV). The Chaldeans of Hab 1:6 are the Ro-
mans, who appear under the name Kittim in the sect's literature. 
The lion and his whelps of Nah 2:12 are interpreted to be a Deme-
trius and an Antiochus of the Seleucid rulers who lived in the 
Maccabean period, as well as their successors down to the appear-
ance of the rulers of the Kittim (the Romans). 
On the other hand, some interpretations of the Qumran sectar-
ians have been helpful toward a better understanding of certain 
biblical passages, although the total theological harvest in this 
respect has been rather meager. One beautiful expansion of a 
scriptural passage is the Aaronitic blessing of Num 6:24-26, used 
by the Essenes in their meetings, as recorded in their Manual of 
Discipline. In the following translation the Essene additions are 
in italic: 
May he bless you with every good, 
and keep you from aZZ evil, 
and may he shine [into] your heart with wisdom of life, 
and be gracious to you with eternal knowledge, 
and may he lift up his merciful face upon you, 
for eternal peace (Manual of Discipline, 11.2-4). 
Conclusion  
A study of the voluminous ancient Jewish religious literature 
shows that, just like modern Christians, the Jews of the apostolic 
age wrestled with problems of interpreting their sacred writings. 
This was not done in a uniform way, as the foregoing pages and 
examples show. From these examples one can clearly see that some 
of the hermeneutic principles employed by the Jewish teachers of 
the apostolic age were sound and valid. They can still be applied 
to enhance our correct understanding of the Scriptures and to make 
their teachings relevant for the situation in the twentieth century. 
On the other hand, the Jewish writings also reveal that the rabbis 
frequently employed farfetched interpretations and made the Scrip-
tures say things they hardly implied, much less said, in order to 
make them practical to first-century Judaism. 
Thus the orthodox Pharisees manipulated the texts in order to 
obtain a scriptural basis for their teachings dealing with every

--- Page 36 ---
26 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
detail of daily Life and thought. The Jews in the Hellenistic 
world, on the other hand, allegorized the Bible to make it palat-
able to the Greek mind, whereas the eschatologically oriented mo-
nastic Essenes read into the texts things they desired to find 
there. To one trained to apply sound principles of scriptural 
hermeneutics, the resultant interpretations often seem absurd. 
Whether they originate with the ancient orthodox rabbis of Pales-
tine, the intellectual Hellenists of Alexandria, or the monks of 
Qumran, many of these interpretations cannot be accepted by modern 
students of the Bible. 
It is in the light of these frequent ancient Jewish misinter-
pretations of the Bible that we can understand that Jesus said to 
the Pharisees, "For the sake of your tradition, you have made void 
the word of God" (Mt 15:6, RSV), and to the Sadducees, "You are 
wrong, because you know neither the scriptures nor the power of 
God" (Mt 22:29, RSV). 
READING LIST  
Brownlee, William H. The Meaning of the Qumran Scrolls for the 
Bible. New York: Oxford University Press, 1964. Chap. 4: 
"The Meaning for Old Testament Interpretation," pp. 62-109. 
KOnig, Eduard. Hermeneutik des Alten Testaments. Bonn: A. Mar-
cus & E. Webers Verlag, 1916. Chap. 4: "Geschichte der Aus-
legung bei den Juden," pp. 6-16. 
Mielziner, M. Introduction to the Talmud. New York: Bloch Pub-
lishing Co., 1925. Part II: "Legal Hermeneutics of the 
Talmud," pp. 117-187. 
Siegfried, Carl. Philo von Alexandria als ausleger des Alten 
Testaments. Amsterdam: Philo Press, 1970 (reprint of the 
1875 edition). 
Sowers, Sidney G. The Hermeneutics of Philo and Hebrews. Rich-
mond, Va.: John Knox Press, 1965.

--- Page 38 ---
Born in Grenada, West Indies, Dr. Wal-
ter B. Douglas is an assistant profes-
sor of church history at the Seventh-
day Adventist Theological Seminary 
where he has been teaching since 1969. 
His doctoral studies completed at 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, 
in 1972, centered on 17th century Puri-
tanism. The research for his disserta-
tion involved a new approach to the 
interpretation of the history of the 
English Church from 1660 onward. 
[For biographical sketch of Dr. Kenneth 
A. Strand, please see p. 88.]

--- Page 39 ---
3. Interpretation of the Bible in the 
Early and Medieval Church  
KENNETH A. STRAND and 
WALTER B. DOUGLAS 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
Biblical interpretation among the early church fathers tended 
to follow the lines indicated in the NT use of the OT and to uti-
lize some of the contemporary Jewish rabbinic modes of dealing 
with the Bible text. Certain of these church fathers leaned toward 
the Philonic allegorization mentioned in the immediately preceding 
chapter. During the Middle Ages there was a heightening of the 
tendency to allegorize. However, there was also somewhat of a 
return toward literal interpretation, which kind of interpretation 
finally found a more complete revival in the work of the major 
Protestant Reformers. 
In this short chapter it is impossible to give more than the 
briefest survey of Scripture interpretation during the early-church 
and medieval periods. Therefore, rather than trying to be compre-
hensive we simply will look at a few individuals or groups as rep-
resenting some of the prominent tendencies. 
Early-Church Use of Scripture  
for Purposes of Exemplification 
A good deal of scriptural quotation or allusion to Scripture 
in the early-church period--particularly in letters, sermons, and 
treatises intended for Christian readers--utilizes the Scripture 
texts or passages as illustrations of what Christians should be 
or do in the particular circumstances before them. This use of 
Scripture is evident, for example, in epistolary materials from 
some of the earliest fathers, such as Clement of Rome. 
Clement wrote to the Corinthian church possibly as early as 
A.D. 95 exhorting it to unity in view of its schismatic tendencies. 
In his letter he uses OT Scripture freely to illustrate such matters 
as the evil of jealousy; the value of repentance; and the need for

--- Page 40 ---
30 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
humility, unity, orderliness, and respect for regularly consti-
tuted authority. As an example of humility he refers to David 
and quotes the first seventeen verses of Ps 51, and as an illus-
tration of how sedition regarding the priestly office was averted 
in ancient Israel he calls attention to the experience recorded 
in Numbers 17 about Aaron's rod that budded. He alludes to NT 
writings as authoritative too, even though at this early time the 
NT canon had not yet been declared. There are a number of reflec-
tions from various of the Gospels and epistles, and special men-
tion is made of "the epistle of the blessed Apostle Paul," in 
which "under the inspiration of the Spirit, he wrote to you con-
cerning himself, and Cephas, and Apollos, because even then parties 
had been formed among you." (For the above illustrations see 
chaps. 18, 43, and 47 of Clement's epistle. Most translations 
herein are from Ante-Nicene and Nicene-Post-Nicene Fathers.) 
Clement represents the way in which the earliest Christian 
writers used Scripture for hortatory purposes, namely, to draw 
illustrations for application to the practical matters at hand. 
Not only in letters but also frequently in homilies and in doc-
trinal, disciplinary, and polemical treatises a like use of 
Scripture occurs. 
Use of Pagan Sources in Apologies  
and in Other Early Christian Literature 
A type of early-church literature that sometimes may be puz-
zling because of its references to pagan writers is the apologeti-
cal works of the 2d and 3d centuries. Among the more important of 
various apologists are Justin Martyr, whose extant writings are 
dated to about the middle of the 2d century; and Tertullian of 
Carthage, who wrote his famous Apology about A.D. 197. Indeed, 
Tertullian was a prolific writer, producing a number of polemical, 
doctrinal, and practical treatises as well. 
Tertullian's Apology illustrates the manner in which Christian 
apologists endeavored to defend Christianity against its heathen 
persecutors by repudiating false charges, asserting the superiority 
of Christian literature over pagan literature, and explaining 
Christian belief and practice to those not familiar with the true 
nature of Christianity. Frequently non-Christian writings are 
mentioned for no other reason than to prove them inferior to the 
sacred Scriptures of the Christians. 
There are examples of the use of such writings to explicate 
Christian doctrine. Tertullian when explaining Christ's spiritual 
nature refers (chap. 21) to the Stoic philosopher Zeno's teaching

--- Page 41 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 31 
about the logos and also to Cleanthes' ascription of Creation to 
an all-pervasive spiritual essence. Such use of pagan sources 
represents communicative concern rather than adoption of Greek 
thought. Indeed, Tertullian utilizes concepts from Greek philo-
sophical thought, too, in such a polemical work as Against Praxeas, 
again from the standpoint of their being a communicative vehicle. 
It should be noted that inasmuch as apologists were addressing 
pagans they naturally incorporated language and concepts familiar 
to the intended readers. This represents a hermeneutical considera- 
tion of first rank akin to that faced by modern-day missionaries 
who carry the message of the Bible to peoples whose backgrounds 
are quite alien to the Christian tradition. 
For present-day missionaries, terminological problems may be 
severe; for how can one make meaningful the term "Lamb of God" to 
people who have never seen sheep and lambs, or "whiter than snow" 
to persons who have never seen snow? 
The communication problem of the early apologists was not 
entirely dissimilar. Although it is true that some of these writers 
had absorbed certain Greek notions (including immortality of the 
soul), most frequently their mode of expression was simply the 
result of an honest effort to put the Bible message and an expla-
nation of Christian practice into terms heathen addressees could 
understand. 
Tertullian's Use of a  
Christian Extrabiblical Source  
Tertullian in some of his writings illustrates an interesting 
use of a Christian extrabiblical source. This church father first 
became converted to the Catholic mainstream branch of Christianity 
late in the 2d century, but during the first decade of the 3d cen-
tury moved his allegiance to a stricter wing, called Montanism. 
This wing was considered by many as some sort of offshoot of the 
universal church. The group originated about the middle of the 
2d century in Phrygia in Asia Minor, where the "prophet" Montanus 
and the "prophetesses" Priscilla and Maximilla had had visions 
they considered to be manifestations of the era of the Holy Spirit 
(their own time) in contrast to earlier periods of supposed lesser 
light--the era of the Father (the OT period), and the era of the 
Son (the NT period). Tertullian as a Montanist accepts the new 
revelations (or new prophecy, as he calls it) as authoritative. 
In his treatise On the Veiling of Virgins he utilizes it as a 
solid basis for belief in addition to Scripture.

--- Page 42 ---
32 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Indeed, the Montanist revelations also had their effect on 
his understanding of the biblical text itself, as may be noted in 
regard to his interpretation of the descent of the holy city New 
Jerusalem (in Against Marcion, Book III, chap. 25). Among the 
Montanist "revelations" was one claiming that the New Jerusalem 
would very soon descend in Phrygia. Although Tertullian shifts 
the scene of its descent to Palestine, he places that descent at 
the beginning of the millennium instead of at the end of the 1,000 
years, as would be indicated by a literal understanding of the 
20th and 21st chapters of Revelation. The influence of the Monta-
nist extrabiblical source in modifying the interpretation of the 
biblical text is evident here. 
The Use of Allegorization in the Early Church  
Generally, the various early church fathers had at least a 
tendency toward allegorization of Bible references. One may take 
as an example Irenaeus, a disciple of Polycarp, who in turn was a 
disciple of the apostle John. In his famous Against Heresies, 
written about A.D. 185, he referred (Book V, chap. 8, sec. 4) to 
the OT description of clean and unclean animals as figuratively 
delineating classes of mankind: Those animals that "have a dou-
ble hoof and ruminate [chew the cud]" are clean. They represent 
the true Christians, "who make their way by faith steadily towards 
the Father and the Son" as "denoted by the steadiness of those 
which divide the hoof," and who meditate "day and night upon the 
words of God" as indicated by chewing the cud. The "unclean" fall 
into three classes: (1) the Gentiles, who "neither divide the 
hoof nor ruminate" ("those persons who have neither faith in God, 
nor do meditate on His words"); (2) the Jews, "represented by 
the animals that chew the cud but lack the double hoof"; and (3) 
heretics, indicated by the animals that have split hooves but do 
not chew the cud. 
A more pervasive form of allegorization than that of Irenaeus 
had appeared in the Epistle of Barnabas (written as early as about 
A.D. 130, probably from Alexandria). This Barnabas, now generally 
recognized by scholars as not the companion of the apostle Paul, 
seems to have endeavored to heighten a tendency toward allegoriza-
tion, noticeable in Gal 4:22-31, where the apostle uses Sarah and 
Hagar and Isaac and Ishmael as representatives of old-covenant and 
new-covenant concepts. This sort of illustration (it is referred 
to as "allegory" in Gal 4:24) does not deny the reality of the 
original experiences to which reference is made but, rather, draws 
a relevant Christian lesson from them. 
Barnabas' departure from Paul's methodology in this respect

--- Page 43 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 33 
is twofold: (1) Barnabas allegorizes profusely; and (2) his kind 
of allegorization is such as often to deny or at least minimize 
the original intent of the OT Scriptures. We may notice his ref-
erence (chap. 10 of his book) to what he calls three doctrines in 
Moses' mind when Moses spoke of unclean animals: (1) The prohibi-
tion of swine's flesh means that God's children should refrain from 
the company of "men who resemble swine" (who in time of pleasure 
forget their Lord, but in time of want acknowledge Him); (2) the 
mention of certain birds of prey signifies the need to avoid asso-
ciation with persons who "know not how to procure food for them-
selves by labour and sweat, but seize on that of others"; (3) the 
command not to eat "the lamprey, or the polypus, or the cuttlefish" 
means that one should not join himself "or be like to such men as 
are ungodly to the end, and are condemned to death," just as those 
fishes "make their abode in the mud which lies at the bottom" of 
the sea. 
Barnabas thinks that although the Israelite people in general 
understood Moses' statements as referring only to literal meats, 
David in the first Psalm grasped the real meaning of the "three 
doctrines": "'Blessed is the man who hath not walked in the coun-
sel of the ungodly,' even as the fishes [referred to] go in dark-
ness to the depths [of the sea]; 'and hath not stood in the way of 
sinners,' even as those who profess to fear the Lord, but go astray 
like swine; 'and hath not sat in the seat of scorners,' even as 
those birds that lie in wait for prey." 
It would appear that Barnabas had a high regard for Scripture 
in view of the extent to which he uses it throughout his epistle. 
However, the way he treats the OT in an effort to give it Christian 
meaning leaves little doubt that he is on a dangerous hermeneutical 
track. With his kind of exegesis and interpretation each exegete 
or interpreter can become virtually a law to himself. 
Origen's Threefold Interpretation 
The Epistle of Barnabas is the earliest extant Christian 
witness for a tendency particularly prevalent in Alexandria that 
crops up again in the writings of later church fathers from there, 
such as Clement of Alexandria and Origen in the late 2d century 
and first part of the 3d century. 
The latter, who for some years succeeded Clement as head of 
the catechetical school in that city, can be considered to repre-
sent the pinnacle of allegorical-type interpretation in the early 
church. This church father concluded that Scripture has a three-
fold meaning comparable to body, soul, and spirit in the human

--- Page 44 ---
34 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
being. Imbued with Platonic or Neo-Platonic concepts, he viewed 
matter negatively. 
Likewise, for his Scripture interpretation he placed the 
least significance on the corporeal ("literal" or "material") 
meaning, attributing increasing value to the "soulish" ("psychical") 
and especially "spiritual" meanings. He did not reject the idea 
that the literal, or corporeal, is present in much of Scripture 
and that it has a certain degree of value, but he concluded that 
the "spiritual" significance is the most important and that Scrip-
ture sometimes includes "material" or "literal" falsehood in an 
effort to provide "spiritual" truth. 
In Book IV, chapter 1, of his On First Principles, where he 
treats the subject in detail, he says, for example, that "the 
principal aim being to announce the 'spiritual' connection in those 
things that are done, and that ought to be done, where the Word 
found that things done according to the history could be adapted 
to these mystical senses, He made use of them." On the other hand, 
where "in the narrative of the development of super-sensual things, 
there did not follow the performance of those certain events," 
the Scriptures incorporated in the account "some event that did 
not take place; sometimes what could not have happened; sometimes 
what could, but did not." 
As an illustration of Origen's "spiritual" interpretation, 
one may note his reference (in Series of Commentaries on Matthew, 
chapter 50) to the "second advent" of the Word as a "daily" expe-
rience in "the prophetic clouds"--in "the writings of the prophets 
and apostles," which reveal Christ. 
Origen obviously represents a heightened and more sophisti-
cated form of the tendencies already apparent in Barnabas. Origen, 
moreover, incorporates Greek concepts into his theology as an 
integral part of that theology rather than as simply the sort of 
communicative tools noticeable in the writings of other Christian 
apologists. He thinks, for example, of universal salvation and 
a form of metempsychosis (transmigration of souls) akin to Platonic 
philosophy. He also holds Greek notions regarding the relation-
ship of form and matter. 
Origen's exegetical method and interpretational results were 
far from universally accepted in the early church. Nevertheless, 
touches of his influence lingered on; and his threefold interpre-
tation was later expanded into a fourfold one that became standard 
during the Middle Ages. This kind of interpretation, which will 
be treated in more detail later, conceived of Scripture as embrac-
ing "literal," "allegorical," "tropological," and "anagogical"

--- Page 45 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 35 
meanings. It was a method even Martin Luther used in his early 
theological lectures at the University of Wittenberg, but from 
which the Reformer soon broke away in favor of a grammatical-
historical approach. 
The Role of Augustine 
The early-church father who undoubtedly had the greatest 
influence in molding both doctrine and hermeneutic for the entire 
medieval period was Augustine of Hippo (d. A.D. 430). Although 
his system of allegorizing was not precisely like that of Origen, 
similarities may be noted. Like Origen he imbibed Neo-Platonic 
concepts that led him toward his allegorical interpretation and 
influenced some of his doctrinal positions. 
Illustrations of the way in which he allegorized Scripture 
appear in Book XX of his City of God, where he propounds the 
"amillennial" view, which became standard Christian interpretation 
of Rev 20 for many centuries. In his opinion, the "thousand years" 
could be understood in two ways: either "the sixth thousand of 
years" of earth's history, or "the whole duration of this world." 
Thus, the "1000 years" of Rev 20 are considered as applying either 
to a part or to the whole of this present earth's history, not to 
a future millennial age. 
Two illustrations of Augustine's mode of interpreting some 
of the specifics of Rev 20 must suffice here: The "bottomless 
pit" or "abyss" into which Satan was thrown represents "the count- 
less multitude of the wicked whose hearts are unfathomably deep 
in malignity against the church of God; not that the devil was 
not there before, but he is said to be cast in thither, because, 
when prevented from harming believers, he takes more complete pos- 
session of the ungodly." The "fire out of heaven" that devours 
the wicked, he says, "is well understood of the firmness of the 
saints, wherewith they refuse to yield obedience to those who 
rage against them"; by God's grace "the saints become unconquerable, 
and so torment their enemies." 
Augustine was not always consistent in his Scripture inter-
pretation. He had once been a premillenarian, but apparently his 
distaste for the grossly materialistic earthly millennium pro-
pounded by the chiliasts (or premillenarians of his day) led him 
toward his amillennialist position. Among various factors influ-
encing his hermeneutic was his changing attitude in view of what 
he deemed to be the needs of the times. One may note, for example, 
his early attitude of seeking to win Donatists to the orthodox 
church by "discussion, reasoning, and persuasion," in contrast to

--- Page 46 ---
36 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
his later attitude of compelling them by force, for which (as 
noted in his epistle 93) he thought he had Scriptural support in 
the words "compel them to come in" (Lk 14:23). 
Synopsis of Early-Church Developments  
The patristic writers often used hermeneutical principles in 
which great dangers inhered, but what has been said above should 
not be taken to mean that all treatment of Scripture during the 
early-church period was basically unsound. As has already been 
noted, a good deal of the use of Scripture by church fathers in 
addressing Christian readers was for the purpose of providing 
practical example. Also, the apologetical works utilized the 
sound principle of making the Bible message and Christian practice 
understandable to non-Christians. Works of the kinds just men-
tioned, plus various polemical writings, frequently reveal an 
extensive use of Bible texts accompanied by analysis and exegesis 
well thought out and solid. 
One may think, for example, of Irenaeus, to whom reference 
has already been made in illustrating an allegorizing tendency 
quite generally prevalent among the church fathers. But certainly 
he is to be remembered, too, in his significant role as a champion 
of the cause of Christianity against various Gnostic heresies that 
were endeavoring to split the church apart. In refuting the Gnos-
tic claim that the Saviour, who descended from heaven, did not have 
a real body, Irenaeus used such texts as Mt 1:18 and Jn 1:13, 14, 
plus several passages from Paul's epistles, to show that a "Divine 
Christ" was not a distinct entity from a "human Jesus," as Gnos-
tics would claim; but rather that the "Son of God was born of a 
virgin, and that He Himself was Christ the Saviour whom the proph-
ets had foretold."--Against Heresies, Book III, chap. 16. 
We may think also of Tertullian, who championed the cause of 
Christianity against Gnostic heresies and against Marcion. More-
over, in his Against Praxeas he dealt with a Monarchian view that 
had taken hold of part of the church itself; namely, that God the 
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit represent simply one 
divine Person who manifested Himself in different ways at differ-
ent times. To this, Tertullian aptly responded with various pas-
sages of Scripture, asking, for example, the question as to whether 
if this were really so, to whom did Christ pray when He said, "Our 
Father which is in heaven"? 
Finally, in closing this section, we may again mention Augus-
tine, who although he provided medieval interpreters with a herme-
neutic of somewhat allegorical nature, also gave a good deal of

--- Page 47 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 37 
sound interpretation in various of his works. His treatment of 
the relationship of grace and law in his treatise On Spirit and 
Letter is beautiful, and was influential on Martin Luther at a 
crucial point in the Reformer's career. For purposes of illustra-
tion we note one conclusion therein, relating to Rom 3:24. "It 
is not, therefore, by the law nor is it by their own will," that 
men are justified. Rather, justification comes freely by God's 
grace, "not that it is wrought without our will; but our will is 
by the law shown to be weak, that grace may heal its infirmity; 
and that our healed will may fulfill the law, not by compact under 
the law, nor yet in the absence of law" (chap. 15). 
The Place of the Bible in the Middle Ages  
The Bible was the most studied book in the Middle Ages, and 
Bible study represented the highest branch of learning. Yet in 
the opinion of one scholar, there is not much in medieval inter-
pretation that is strikingly novel (see Farrar, History of Inter-
pretation, p. 245). 
So in approaching the subject of medieval exegesis it is our 
desire to highlight the salient principles of interpretation 
employed by the medieval theologians in the exposition and dis-
covery of the message of the Word of God. Hopefully, these prin-
ciples will provide a fruitful basis for our understanding of the 
hermeneutics of this period. 
Insofar as the interpretation of the Bible is concerned the 
medieval period can be described as a period of transition from 
patristic emphasis on exegetical theology to the divorce between 
biblical interpretation and theology, which becomes most noticeable 
in the writings of Thomas Aquinas. As will be seen, Aquinas in-
sisted on the literal interpretation as having primary importance, 
upon which all other interpretations are based. Although the men 
of the Middle Ages developed their own technical aids to study 
their auxiliary sciences of textual criticism and biblical lan-
guages, the material of biblical study remained the same. As 
Farrar remarked, "We find very little exegesis except the glimmer-
ings and decays of patristic expositions." They give us volumes 
of dogma, morality, and system that profess to be used in Scrip-
ture but for the most part have no real connection with the pas-
sages to which they are attached (see Farrar, History of Interpre-
tation, pp. 245ff.). One might suggest that the reason for this 
practice and its result is the interpreters' assumption that 
revelation not only is expressed in Scripture but also is hidden 
in it, and this assumption led them to perceive a multiplicity of 
senses or meanings in Scripture.

--- Page 48 ---
38 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The Allegorical Method of Interpretation 
As already noted, during the later patristic period and in 
the Middle Ages a system of allegorization was developed accord-
ing to which four meanings were to be sought in every text. Some-
times, indeed, there were as many as seven, but the more normal 
number of senses was four: the allegorical, which sets forth what 
should be believed; the literal, which is the plain evident mean-, 
ing; the tropological, which is the moral sense, telling men what 
to do; and the anagogical, which centers in what Christians are 
to hope. 
From the beginning of our period (ca. A.D. 600), allegory 
held a dominant place in the minds of medieval theologians. Indeed, 
severe criticism of Catholic exegetes has arisen because they made 
so much use of the allegorical interpretation. However, these 
exegetes did not intend in any way to question or reject the his-
torical foundations of Scripture. On the contrary, their purpose 
was to find a symbolic value in history. 
Claudius of Turin points approvingly to this practice. The 
Word of God, he declares, is incarnate in Scripture, which like 
man has a body and a soul. The body is the wording of the sacred 
text, the "letter," the literal meaning; the soul is the spiritual 
sense. To explain the literal sense is to expound litteraliter 
vel carnaliter; littera is almost interchangeable with corpus. 
Beryl Smalley in her book The Study of the Bible in the Middle 
Ages observes that if in rare moments of skepticism a medieval 
scholar questioned the truth of Scripture, he never doubted that 
it had letter and spirit; he only feared that the spirit might be 
bad. Naturally, then, he understood relationship between letter 
and spirit in the same way as he did the relationship between body 
and soul. 
What we now call exegesis based on the study of the text and 
of biblical history, in the widest sense belongs to the literal 
exposition. The spiritual exposition generally consists of pious 
meditations or religious teachings for which the text was used 
merely as a convenient starting point. It is obvious that picking 
meanings out of the Bible like this, rather than on the basis of 
context, can lead far astray. But the modus operandi of medieval 
interpretation of Scripture is founded on the belief that all things 
created can find a basis in Scripture in the sense of being sacred 
words or signs of divine things. 
Thomas Aquinas expresses this view most clearly in his writ-
ings. "Physical creatures," he declares, "signify something sacred,

--- Page 49 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 39 
namely the divine wisdom and goodness"; and "by means of the like-
ness of the physical things in divine Scripture, scriptural things 
are described for us."--Summa Theologica, III, a60, art. 3, and 1. 
According to this premise and other related ideas, all things 
are considered to have sacramental significance that leads to God. 
This is, in fact, the secret of medieval interpretation of the 
Bible. It is evident in Bonaventura's view of the relationship 
between the interpretation of the Bible and theology. For him 
theology has its foundation in Scripture, which is divine revela-
tion made evident through the Holy Spirit. Thus, the Bible con-
tains the words of eternal life, written not only that we may 
believe but also that we may possess eternal life. It is hardly 
surprising, then, that the medieval theologians and exegetes seemed 
mainly interested in finding in the Word of God what they thought 
was spiritual nourishment for the people. In fact, so firmly 
established was this approach to Scripture that it had a direct 
and lasting influence on medieval eucharistic teaching. 
Examples of Allegorization  
The modern reader may be tempted to ask: Can it be true that 
the preachers and the faithful were taught that the word mountain 
in Holy Scriptures is to be interpreted primarily to mean "virgin," 
or in the plural to stand for "angels," "apostles," "precepts," or 
the "Testaments"? 
By looking at a few more examples of allegorizing we begin to 
realize the complexity of the interpretation of Scripture in the 
medieval period. According to the allegorical sense, the raising 
of Lazarus signifies a man in mortal sin who repents, confesses, 
and receives absolution. This is quite a common interpretation. 
After the raising of Lazarus it was said to the disciples, "Loose 
him." This was taken to mean that God quickens a repenting sinner 
but that he is never loosed except by the ministers of the church. 
The use of allegory is also shown in the example of the word 
sea, which could be understood in seven different ways. It could 
mean a gathering of water, Scripture, the present age, the human 
heart, the active life, heathen, or baptism. The allegorical 
interpretation survived largely in preaching. But for a rational, 
almost rationalistic, theological method, such a subjective atti-
tude toward Scripture could not prove satisfactory.

--- Page 50 ---
40 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The Influence of the Universities  
and Religious Orders  
It is of extreme importance to bear in mind that the movement 
for understanding and interpreting the Bible derives from the uni-
versities and the new religious orders. According to Miss Smalley, 
"If we are looking for a critical approach to interpretation in 
the 12th and 13th centuries, we must go to the new religious orders, 
Cistercians, Canons Regular, Friars Preacher and Minor, all zealots 
for the faith and the papacy."--Study of the Bible in the Middle 
Ages, p. xx. 
We must follow the centralization of studies at Paris, the 
development of classroom equipment, the Gloss (standard commentary) 
and its uses, and the development of academic functions supple-
mentary to the lectures--the university sermon and the disputation. 
These exercises determine the form and to an extent the content 
of medieval exegesis.--/bid., p. xv. 
At the universities all interpretations were based on the 
multiple senses of Scripture. The reason for this method seems 
to have been twofold. In the first place, for the leading scholars 
and writers in the early Middle Ages (and for many writers even 
later) the problem of the relation of revelation to reason posed 
particular hardship. The fact is that throughout the patristic 
period theology had been largely a matter of exegesis. Theological 
systems were attempts to interpret as broadly as possible the words 
of God in Scripture. But as Professor Grant points out, natural 
theology was used as rarely as possible.--R. M. Grant, The Bible 
in the Church, p. 102. In view of this fact, the one thing neces-
sary was to discover what was predicted and prefigured in Scrip-
ture as insights given by God for His people. Thus Cassidorus 
affirms that the Psalms are full of the liberal arts. 
The second reason relates to the influence of the Greek 
fathers and the "vitality of Platonism," which reached the medieval 
scholar largely through Augustine. These influences determined 
the world view of the medieval thinkers; and it was ordinarily 
believed, as Miss Smalley expresses it, that "Scripture, like 
the visible world, is a great mirror reflecting God, and therefore 
all and every kind of truth."--See R. M. Grant, The Bible in the 
Church, p. 102. 
The question was always raised: What is God saying in His 
Word? Did He intend to conceal His meaning or did He intend to 
express it? The Aristotelian exposition of nature, which was 
gaining currency among the newer theologians, did not take seri-
ously the idea of symbolism. And in view of this, one begins to

--- Page 51 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 41 
see emerging a new emphasis on interpretation, namely, the literal. 
Some Medieval Interpreters of Scripture  
Enough has been said to indicate the variety of interpreta-
tion in the Middle Ages. We must now look briefly at some of the 
more important figures concerned with the interpretation of the 
Bible. From the galaxy of well-known expositors we may choose the 
following as among the more important: Bernard of Clairvaux, Hugo 
of St. Victor, Andrew of St. Victor, Langton, and Aquinas. 
Bernard (ca. 1091-1153) was famous not only for his preaching 
but also for his interpreting. Among his extensive written works 
are 86 sermons on the Song of Songs. Bernard utilizes a traditional 
threefold sense--historical, moral or figurative, and mystical--and 
interprets the Song of Songs as an allegory of the relation between 
Christ and the soul of the individual Christian. His way of study-
ing and interpreting Scripture seemed more congenial to life within 
the cloister than to the world outside. He engaged in fanciful and 
exaggerated interpretation, but his overriding concern was always 
to be practical. Bernard's aim was to encourage morality and deepen 
the spirituality of the faithful. 
A notable example of his interpretation is reflected in his 
treatment of Song of Songs 1:2: "Thy love is better than wine." 
Here the maid addresses her beloved. According to Bernard, these 
words refer to Christ, and they mean his patience and clemency. 
The following verse states, "Therefore do the virgins love thee." 
Bernard interprets the word virgins as "angels," and then he 
proceeds to discuss the nine orders of angels. 
Hugo of St. Victor (1097?-1141) was one of the most learned 
interpreters of Scripture. Although his tendency was in the 
direction of the Alexandrian threefold principle, he distinguished 
himself for his emphasis on the literal sense. However, for him 
the literal sense was more than the bare word; it was indeed the 
meaning of the word, despite the fact that the meaning could be 
figurative. It is asserted that although Hugo lived more than a 
hundred years before Aquinas, he seems to have grasped the Thomist 
principle that the clue to prophecy and metaphor is the writer's 
intention; the literal sense includes everything the sacred writer 
meant to say. 
A remarkable advance was made in biblical interpretation by 
Andrew of St. Victor, a student of Hugo's who flourished in the 
second half of the 12th century. He learned from his master the 
ability and the importance of utilizing all available knowledge

--- Page 52 ---
42 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
in interpretation. His methodological principle was to treat 
selected portions of the Bible, to aim at removing hindrances to 
a literal interpretation, and to leave aside both the spiritual 
and the theological aspects. 
When Andrew dealt with controversial passages he made use of 
a twofold exegetical method. One was based on the Vulgate with 
a Christian explanation; the other was based on the Hebrew text 
with a Jewish explanation. This methodology is illustrated in 
his treatment of Is 7:14-16: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive," 
etc. Here Andrew accepts the Jewish interpretation because it is 
the literal one, and he seems to doubt the adequacy of the Chris-
tian interpretation. Andrew was criticized for finding too-easy 
agreement with Jewish exegetes. Nevertheless, one of the valuable 
results of his work is the interest he aroused in the original 
sources. 
Stephen Langton (1150-1228), Archbishop of Canterbury, was 
another significant interpreter of the Bible. Quite apart from 
his reputation as an interpreter, he is credited with introducing 
the present system of chapter division. Langton displayed a prac-
tical bent in his work on the Bible. He aimed at ensuring a sound 
text. His energies were spent in attempting to clarify the dis-
tinction between literal and spiritual interpretations. Consistent 
with the prevailing concept of his time was his belief that the 
spiritual interpretation was superior to the literal. But even 
during his lifetime a change was already noticeable in the concep-
tion of the spiritual meaning. In the 12th century the spiritual 
interpretation exerted a greater influence on preaching. It became 
a means for instructing the ordinary simple Christian in a concrete 
and pictorial form. Instead of explicating the Bible text in terms 
of abstract virtues and vices as these struggle within the human 
soul, interpretation came to deal with "the behaviour of groups, 
of types, and religious and social abuses."--Smalley, Study of 
the Bible in the Middle Ages, p. 245. 
Langton, who was at the center of ecclesiastical and political 
affairs, took an active part in this change in interpretation. 
For him the one test in interpretation was simply conformity with 
the Christian faith. If the interpretation was in accordance with 
the faith, it could be accepted. To be sure, Langton found greater 
freedom in spiritual meaning, as distinct from literal. Neverthe-
less, the spiritual sense had to be based on what is signified by 
the Word. 
We now come to the greatest of all the scholastic theologians 
of the Middle Ages, Thomas Aquinas, who by his emphasis on rational 
philosophical arguments was foremost in setting forth an early

--- Page 53 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 43 
speculative form of "natural theology." It is interesting to 
note that Aquinas approached the interpretation of the Bible as 
a philosopher-theologian rather than as a biblical scholar in the 
more specific sense, and there were several basic tensions in his 
position. The meaning of Scripture was of tremendous significance 
to him, and yet he engaged in philosophical reasoning and discus-
sion perhaps more than any of his contemporaries. Again, while 
he took the position of defending the primacy of revelation as 
contained in Scripture, his use of Scripture, like his utilization 
of philosophy, was also for the confirmation of ecclesiastical 
dogma. 
It is of great importance, Thomas contended, to understand 
what the Bible says. To be sure, Scripture uses metaphors, he 
knew, but these can be understood easily and naturally: "It is 
natural to man to attain intellectual truths through sensible 
objects, because all our knowledge originates through sense; hence 
in Holy Scripture spiritual truths are fittingly taught under the 
likeness of material things."--Summa Theologica, 1.1:9. 
Aquinas defends the view that the literal sense of Scripture 
is the basis for the other senses, which can be built upon it. 
He resists all who would argue that it is possible to have several 
senses in Scripture. His thought on this idea proceeds along three 
main lines. The first is the most serious. He observes that "many 
different senses in one text produce confusion and deception and 
destroy all force of argument. Hence no argument, but only falla-
cies, can be deduced from a multiplicity of propositions. But Holy 
Scripture ought to be able to state the truth without any fallacy." 
(Cf. Grant, The Bible in the Church, p. 106.) 
His second objection merely points to the confusion and lack 
of system in the allegorical method and raises questions about use 
of this method. The third objection focuses on the fourfold divi-
sion, and is severely critical. Aquinas maintains that the literal 
sense is concerned with the meaning of words, which can be used 
both properly and figuratively. The literal sense is not the 
figure but the thing that is meant. Thus, the literal meaning of 
"the arm of God" is not that God has an arm, but the meaning of 
the expression "operative power." Aquinas concludes with the suc-
cint remark that "nothing false can even underlie the literal sense 
of Holy Scripture."--/bid., p. 107. 
Thomas uses the story of the garden of Eden as an example of 
his literal interpretation of Scripture. He says that "the things 
which are said of Paradise in Scripture are set forth by means of 
an historical narrative. Now in everything which the Scripture 
thus sets forth the truth (of the story) must be taken as a

--- Page 54 ---
44 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
foundation and upon it spiritual expositions are to be built."--
Cf. Grant, The Bible in the Church, p. 107. At the same time, 
Thomas by no means stood clear of the allegorical method as did 
the Protestant Reformers later. 
Consequences of the Medieval Developments  
It is obvious that there was not very much noticeable change 
in interpretation in the Middle Ages. Yet what there was is 
important. Largely due to Aquinas, a somewhat clearer understand-
ing developed as to what was meant by the literal interpretation. 
The consequences of this particular medieval insistence on the 
literal interpretation of Scripture were incalculable. In the 
first place, an immediate impetus was given to the study of Hebrew 
and the production of literary and historical commentaries on the 
OT. More important was the measure of rejection of the patristic 
theological method with the divorce of theology from exegesis. 
The divorce was immediately followed, if not preceded, by the 
remarriage of theology to philosophy. 
But as Professor Grant has noted, there still remained chil-
dren of the first marriage who were not content with their new 
father. This becomes evident when one realizes the slow develop-
ment of Scholasticism. Another factor in this connection can be 
seen in the work and influence of Nicholas of Lyra, who in his 
commentaries wrote about the spiritual as well as the literal 
sense. He did so when the need for allegorization seemed absent. 
And the final influence was the Reformation, which insisted that 
its concerns were directed toward a return to the method of 
theology through exegesis. 
Side by side with this emphasis on historical studies was 
the claim to objectivity. The interpreter's claim to direct 
inspiration by God in his exegesis became less and less credible. 
The argument took the other direction; that is to say, all knowl-
edge comes through the senses, and scriptural interpretation 
requires no special inner grace. Indeed, in the medieval claim 
to objectivity we discover the genesis of modern scientific and 
critical study of the Bible. 
Summary and Implications  
We have seen that the early church illustrates practicality 
as an important criterion in use of Scripture for Christians them-
selves; and that it reveals, too, an effort to make the gospel 
message understood and appreciated by non-Christian addressees

--- Page 55 ---
The Bible in the Early and Medieval Church 	 45 
through allusion to concepts familiar to those addressees. Cer-
tainly, this attitude toward and treatment of Scripture has rele-
vance for today as well as in the past. 
However, the patristic tendency to allegorize eventually led 
to widespread devaluation of the literal significance of the text 
and became the bane of early-church hermeneutic. It was an ill 
heritage passed on to the Middle Ages, and was heightened by the 
medieval church. Certain medieval theologians saw the danger 
inherent in allegorization and raised their voices against it. 
In spite of this and in spite of the fact that the Protestant 
Reformation in particular brought a wide-scale return to emphasis 
on the literal significance of the Scriptural text as a base for 
drawing spiritual lessons, we can recognize that in our own day 
there has been a reversion to emphasis on meaning sometimes with-
out adherence to adequate literary and historical foundations for 
projecting that meaning. In this respect some of the hermeneutic 
of today bears a strange resemblance to the hermeneutic embodied 
in Origen's "threefold interpretation" and in the "fourfold inter-
pretation," which was so popular during the Middle Ages. And, of 
course, the dangers inherent in the procedure exist today as much 
as they did in those earlier times. Indeed, the vagaries of the 
allegorical method as illustrated in the early-church and medieval-
church periods serve as a stern warning against any hermeneutic 
that would destroy the historical foundations of Scripture or 
subordinate them to a cult of meaning per se. 
On the other hand, the correctives brought by the literal and 
objective approach to Scripture led to a more consistent and stable 
mode of Scripture interpretation, as we have seen. Even here, how-
ever, a caution must be lifted against the sort of methodology that 
in the hands of certain critical scholars has virtually destroyed 
present-day relevance of the Bible message by overemphasizing 
purely historical and linguistic concerns as ends in themselves. 
The spiritual message of Scripture must not be lost sight of. 
The important thing is to base that spiritual message on solid 
historical and linguistic foundations rather than on mere specu-
lation--a need made abundantly clear by developments in the early 
and medieval periods of church history.

--- Page 56 ---
Provost of the La Sierra campus of 
Loma Linda University at Riverside, 
California, and dean of the university's 
college of arts and sciences, Dr. V. 
Norskov Olsen joined the faculty as 
professor of church history in 1968. 
He was a pastor and evangelist for ten 
years prior to his academic assignments 
and served equal terms as academic dean 
and president of Newbold College in 
England over a 12-year period. He 
received the Ph.D. degree from the Uni-
versity of London and the D.Th. degree 
from the University of Basel. For the 
latter his dissertation was entitled: 
"The New Testament Logia on Divorce, A 
Study of Their Interpretation From 
Erasmus to Milton."

--- Page 57 ---
4. Hermeneutical Principles and  
Biblical Authority in Reformation  
and Postreformation Eras  
V. NORSKOV OLSEN 
La Sierra Campus 
Loma Linda University 
Formative Decades  
When Martin Luther at the trial in Worms, 1521, made his 
points of defense irrevocable by the words "Here I stand! I can 
do no other!" his decision became, as Lord Acton wrote, "the most 
pregnant and momentous fact in our history." Even though the Ref-
ormation has been viewed--and with good reasons--from the partic-
ulars of political, social, rationalistic, liberal, and economical 
forces at work, it was essentially religious in character. Within 
the sphere of religion the primary issue was religious authority 
and how to articulate the true meaning of Scriptures. The Refor-
mation began with a reappraisal of the principles of biblical in-
terpretation and grew into a revolt against current hermeneutics 
and the creation of new exegetical tools by which true biblical 
theology and NT Christianity could be restored. In the light of 
the history of the Christian Church and its theology, which is the 
story of how the Scriptures were interpreted (a fact that is often 
overlooked and sadly neglected), the Reformation became a real 
re-formation and re-orientation in the field of hermeneutics. The 
crux of the religious issue at Worms was positively stated by Lu-
ther when he claimed: "I am bound by Scriptures . . . and my con-
science is captive to the Word of God." 
As in the first quarter of the 16th century and also in the 
20th century, the role of biblical authority and a reexamination 
of exegetical principles occupy the minds of Catholic and Protes-
tant theologians. It is our purpose in this chapter, first, to 
point out the factors that created the platform on which Protes-
tant authority could be built and to define the principles of exe-
gesis that emerged; next, to give a bird's-eye view of the various 
phases through which Protestantism passed in order to show how men 
reacted and related themselves to the doctrine of biblical author-
ity held by the early Protestant Reformers. Thus it is hoped to

--- Page 58 ---
48 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
create a theological vantage ground from which present-day her-
meneutical issues can be seen in a true historical perspective. 
The Christian Humanists  
Since the 14th century the Italian humanists had been at work 
recovering the culture of ancient Greece and Rome. The awakening 
of an interest in classical literature gave birth to new intellec-
tual inquiries and revived interest in the study of Latin, Greek, 
and Hebrew languages. In the first quarter of the 16th century 
the Christian humanists availed themselves of the linguistic 
advances in grammar and syntax and made them useful in the study 
of the Bible. Thus prior to the Reformation we find a biblical 
humanism that became a preparatio evangelia. The Christian human-
ists in their historical and philological approach sought to as-
certain what a given text actually meant in the context of Christ's 
teaching and primitive Christianity. The chief early represent-
ative of Christian humanism was John Colet (1466-1519). After 
having imbibed the spirit of the new learning in Italy he returned 
to England, 1496-1497, and began to give his famous lectures, 
first on the epistle to the Romans, and then on 1 Corinthians. 
His objective was to bring out the practical meaning the apostle 
Paul sought to convey to his readers; therefore, he illustrated 
his sermon with comments on the life of the apostles and refer-
ences to the historical conditions in which the epistles were 
written. He delivered his sermons in English and rejected the 
allegorical and mystical exegesis of the scholastic theologians. 
In 1498 Erasmus (1467-1536) arrived in England and attended 
Colet's lectures, and encouraged by them, he took up biblical 
studies, the fruitage of which is seen in his Greek NT (1516); 
his Annotations; and his Paraphrases of the Gospels. Erasmus' NT 
became the basic tool for Luther during the polemic and formative 
years of the Reformation. After the Diet of Worms Luther withdrew 
to Wartburg Castle, and by the help of the Greek NT he translated 
the NT into German within eleven weeks. Later the OT was trans-
lated into German from Hebrew. A better understanding of the OT 
had been made possible by a profound study of the Hebrew language 
by Johann Reuchlin, an uncle of Philip Melanchthon. It seemed 
that medieval scholasticism was being supplanted by a new herme-
neutic more akin to that of the first expositors of the NT. 
Because the Christian humanists relied on the Hebrew and 
Greek texts, they denied the canonical value of the OT Apocrypha. 
The Apocrypha was first included in the Septuagint, a Greek trans-
lation of the OT. Indirectly they repudiated the ecclesiastical 
tradition. In their historico-grammatical method of interpreta-

--- Page 59 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 49 
tion the humanists renounced the fourfold exegetical system of 
medieval scholasticism and replaced it with the literal principle 
of interpretation, which concentrated on finding the literal mean-
ing of a passage. In doing this, they dethroned the significance 
of the Vulgate, the Latin vocabulary of which was the vehicle for 
a medieval theology and the organ for ecclesiastical authority 
and tradition. 
At the Council of Trent, which met in twenty-five sessions 
from 1545 to 1563, the Counter-Reformation creedalized its denials 
of the tenets of the Protestant Reformation. The fourth session 
(April 8, 1546) decreed concerning the Bible. The canonical Scrip-
tures, including the OT Apocrypha, and the ecclesiastical tradition 
were to be received and venerated "with an equal affection of piety 
and reverence," they said. It was also declared that the Latin 
Vulgate, edition, "which, by the lengthened usage of so many ages 
has been approved of in the Church, be, in public lectures, dis-
putations, sermons, and expositions, held as authentic; and that 
no one is to dare, or presume to reject it under any pretext what-
ever." The same was restated more than three centuries later at 
the Vatican Council of 1870, where the question of ecclesiastical 
tradition was further reinforced by the dogma of Papal infalli-
bility and absolutism. 
Roman Catholicism tried to undo the influence of the Christian 
humanists, who sought to go back beyond Thomist-Aristotelian Chris-
tianity by replacing scholastic theology with biblical theology. 
Biblical Authority and Individualism 
The significance of biblical authority and its impact on 
Christian thought ever since can be fully appreciated only in the 
light of some basic philosophical concepts that dominated medieval 
theological thinking. 
In Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) medieval scholasticism attained 
its clearest expression, and Aquinas became the foremost typical 
exponent of the Roman Catholic mind. His Summa Theologia is the 
standard of Catholic orthodoxy and the basis of theological in-
struction. On the other hand, the Reformers spoke of Aquinas as 
the fountain of all heresy and error. Aquinas represented the 
scholastic philosophy termed realism. For the purpose of our 
study all that is necessary to state is that medieval realism 
maintains the powers of being that transcend the individual, as 
in all totalitarian systems. Aquinas was an Aristotelian, and 
with Aristotle he believed that the best government of a multitude 
is that ruled by one. In the religious life it means that the

--- Page 60 ---
50 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
church comes before the individual, as in Roman Catholicism where 
the episcopalian concept of Cyprian that "the bishop is in the 
church and the church in the bishop" attains its summit in the 
pope. Consequently, the pope has absolute temporal and spiritual 
jurisdiction, and Boniface VIII (1294-1305) could say, "All law is 
locked within my breast," and in Unam Sanctam declare "that sub-
mission on the part of every man to the bishop of Rome is alto-
gether necessary for his salvation." 
The 14th century reacted strongly to realism and the Unam 
Sanctam. It is in this reaction that we find not only the theo-
logical roots of biblical authority but also the beginnings of the 
democratic principles of the right of the individual. Notice that 
the theological and philosophical principle undergirding the Re-
formers' concept of authority ties together democracy and Protes-
tantism, whereas Aquinas binds together totalitarianism, collectiv-
ism, and Roman Catholicism in the rule by one. 
William of Ockham (1300-1349), who owed his reputation to his 
theological and political theories and his definition of the Bible 
as the final authority, became a distant voice of the Reformation. 
Ockham countered medieval scholastic theology as it was represented 
by Thomas Aquinas. He represented what we call nominalism and 
fiercely attacked realism. For nominalism only the individual 
object exists, and contrary to realism it emphasizes the value of 
the individual. This is the basis for true democracy and Christian 
individualism as found in Protestantism. It is essential for the 
doctrine of biblical authority and true individualism. As a nom-
inalist, Ockham finds the source of power in the people. This 
idea undermined papal authority and made the Scriptures the final 
source of authority. 
It is characteristic of Ockham to appeal to the Bible con-
stantly. No doctrine incapable of being proved from Holy Scripture 
was to be acknowledged as catholic and necessary to salvation; 
neither the church nor the pope could make new articles of faith. 
In this way he contributed to the unsettlement of the medieval 
theory of the source of authority and assailed the traditional 
doctrines of his time. 
Luther's reference to the Bible as the source of religious 
authority and the sacredness of the conscience of the individual 
is reminiscent of Ockham, but this view was only to be expected, 
for most of Luther's university professors were Ockhamists and 
Luther himself called Ockham "my dear Master." 
The late Cardinal Bea, who became the first director of the 
Secretariat for the Promotion of the Unity of Christians during

--- Page 61 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 51 
the Second Vatican Council, perceived the Protestant concept under 
discussion and at the same time underscored the great difference 
between Protestantism and Catholicism on this point both in the 
past and in the present. Wrote Bea: 
In days gone by, Protestantism, especially in its 
Lutheran form, had a distinctly individualistic character. 
... He [man] was to live in God's sight quite simply, 
reading and interpreting the Bible under the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit, who enlightened him and directed his 
life. ... [Roman Catholicism] places them [the doctrines] 
in the great current of tradition. Fundamentally it is 
the method of the Catholic Church, which is anti-individ-
ualist. ... The whole Reformation world rejected in prin-
ciple any authority in the Church which could oblige the 
consciences of the faithful to follow it. From this stems 
a very practical obstacle to all efforts at unity.--The 
Unity of Christians, pp. 144, 176-177. 
According to the Reformers each Christian has not only the 
privilege but also the duty to examine and judge Christian beliefs 
and practises on the basis of the Bible. Wrote Luther: "To ascer-
tain and judge about doctrine pertains to all and every Christian; 
and in such a way that let him be anathema who injures their right 
by a single hair."--Farrar, History of Interpretation, p. 331. 
Biblical Authority in Faith and Reason  
The element of rationalism was prevalent in early medieval 
scholasticism but was held in check by Augustinian Neo-Platonic 
mysticism. For Anselm of Canterbury (1033-1109) the teaching of 
the church laid down in the Bible and the creeds of the ancient 
church possessed full authority; however, he sought to establish 
a defense of Christian teaching on the sole basis of human reason. 
It was Aquinas who made the medieval synthesis of reason and rev-
elation by teaching "that one could reason his way through natural 
theology (philosophy) to revealed truth (faith)." It was the 
rationalism of Anselm and Aquinas that Ockham sought to overthrow 
by holding that divine revelation rather than human reason is the 
source of theology. 
As a student in the school. of Via Moderna (which was the name 
of Ockham's school) Luther in his training developed appreciation 
for biblical authority and deprecation of reason in matters of 
faith. Being an Augustinian monk he was undergirded by an Augus-
tinian theology of God, sin, depravity, predestination, and grace. 
At Worms Luther not only said: "Unless I am convinced by testimony

--- Page 62 ---
52 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
from Scriptures" but also added "or evident reason." Here reason 
is not used in a Thomistic or later rationalist sense, but in the 
sense of clear deductions from the Bible. Correct reason is bound 
by the Word and enlightened by faith and the inner witness of the 
Holy Spirit. 
The Personal Encounter With Sola Scriptura  
Before the Reformers began to use the Bible in their task of 
calling the church to renewal they themselves had been transformed 
by a personal encounter with the Bible. Zwingli relates how he 
removed himself from the influence of theology and philosophy and 
under the influence of the Spirit of God became sensitive to God's 
Word. Luther sought the Bible when he had "lost hope in himself" 
and continued to study the Bible until it became to him the sole 
authority in soteriology. 
The Reformers, as already noticed in the case of Luther, were 
among the best-educated men of their age. They were steeped in 
ancient and medieval philosophy, thoroughly acquainted with the 
church fathers, handled with ease all the knowledge and tools made 
available by the renaissance and the humanists (and let us be 
thankful for that), but they did not have peace with God. They 
were engaged in an inner soul struggle. The Bible gave the answer 
to the quest of their souls. Through the medium of the sofa scrip-
tura (the Bible alone) principle, divine grace was found, and 
thenceforward the Bible was central in the Reformation. Thus the 
belief was firmly fixed that God in His present redemptive work 
meets man in and through the Scriptures. It was as biblical theo-
logians and preachers of the Word that some Christians in the 
16th century became reformers. 
The Personal Encounter With Sole Fide and Sola Gratia  
Luther's acceptance of the literal, or historico-grammatical, 
principle of interpretation (mentioned earlier in this chapter) 
instead of the fourfold one of medieval exegetes meant in general 
that a given Bible passage had but one meaning. In his difficul-
ties in understanding the relationship between the justice and 
righteousness of God on the one hand and justification on the 
other, Luther took the true (that is, the simple and literal) mean-
ing of the biblical phrase "The just shall live by faith" (Rom 1: 
17) as the imputation of the "righteousness of God" by sheer grace 
through faith. This sole fide (by faith alone) and sola gratia 
(by grace alone) principle became a hermeneutical tool by making 
the OT and the NT a unified witness to Christ (Christuszeugnis)

--- Page 63 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 53 
and a divine record of God's redemptive acts in history (salvation-
history). Luther describes his inner struggle for clarification 
and for the final victory by grace and faith alone in these words: 
Night and day I pondered until I saw the connection 
between the justice of God and the statement that "the 
just shall live by his faith." Then I grasped that the 
justice of God is that righteousness by which through 
grace and sheer mercy God justifies us through faith. 
Thereupon I felt myself to be reborn and to have gone 
through open doors into paradise. The whole of Scripture 
took on a new meaning, and whereas before the "justice of 
God" had filled me with hate, now it became to me inex-
pressibly sweet in greater love. This passage of Paul 
became to me a gate to heaven.--Bainton, Here I Stand, 
p. 65. 
This newfound faith with its hermeneutical consequences made 
its protest against the Catholic concept of salvation and works. 
The Council of Trent reaffirmed Roman Catholic belief. Canon XII 
of the sixth session (Jan. 13, 1547) reads: "If anyone saith, 
that justifying faith is nothing else but confidence in the divine 
mercy which remits sins for Christ's sake; or, that this confidence 
alone is that whereby we are justified: let him be anathema."--
Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, vol. 2, p. 112. 
In the Roman Catholic doctrine of justification the Reformers 
saw the heterogospel that the apostle Paul wrote against in the 
epistle to the Galatians. Consequently, the understanding of the 
right relationship between law and grace was a vital point in order 
to comprehend and interpret the Scriptures correctly. In Reforma-
tion thought in general a twofold use of the law was held (or a 
threefold use, depending on definition). The first function of 
the law is civil, being a means by which society should be organ-
ized and discipline exercised. The second function is spiritual, 
and it has two aspects. First, it is a "mirror" or a "tutor" by 
which man sees his sins and is led to Christ as his refuge. Thus, 
the law and the gospel are not contrary to each other. Second, 
the law is a standard for Christian living. When dealing with 
biblical authority, Luther dethroned reason and favored faith, a 
faith that had experienced the dynamics of sola gratia. We may 
therefore speak of the sola gratia-sola fide principle of inter-
pretation. The significance of this principle then and now is 
clearly defined by a present-day Catholic theologian: 
. The Catholic does not say in the first instance, 
What does the Book say? Rather he asks, What does the 
teaching Church say? ... Over the Book stands the Church,

--- Page 64 ---
54 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
while according to the Reform conception, over the 
Church stands the Book. ...--Weigel, in Fremantle, The 
Papal Encyclicals, p. 11. 
A new era in biblical interpretation and in theological devel-
opment began with the Reformers challenging the traditional theo-
logical positions in the light of a simple but positive message of 
sola fide and sola gratia. 
Sola Scriptura  
Although the doctrines "by faith alone" and "by grace alone" 
constituted the material principle of the Protestant Reformation, 
"the Bible alone" was its formal principle, and it became a con-
stitutive and corrective norm of Christian doctrines and practices. 
The exegetical rules of the Reformers in stressing the literal 
meaning and the self-interpretation of Scripture and their practi-
cal usage can be understood only in the light of that principle. 
Sola Scriptura and the Holy Spirit. The Reformers based the 
sola scriptura principle on a twofold activity of the Holy Spirit. 
They maintained that the same Spirit that inspired the prophets 
must penetrate the hearts of those who read the prophets. 
The relationship between the sola scriptura concept and the 
Holy Spirit is similarly expressed by Luther. Inasmuch as the 
church is the creation of the Bible and not vice versa, the Spirit 
governs the church only through the Scripture. No new revelation 
is necessary, he maintained, because the work of the apostles was 
adequate. 
"The Holy Spirit speaks" is an often-repeated statement. The 
Bible is considered the proclamation of the Holy Spirit, and the 
sole medium through which the Holy Spirit speaks. The intrinsic 
validity of the Scriptures with all inherent truth is recognized 
and confirmed by the inner witness of the Holy Spirit. 
For the Reformers the Bible became the only reliable source 
of authority. The Catholics, on the other hand, confirmed inherent 
truth by the authority of the church. The humanists settled doc-
trinal questions by rational disputation. The Reformers did not 
repudiate use of reason as such but did make it clear that its 
scope was limited. The Spirit cannot be inconsistent with Himself, 
and He will never bring any doctrinal instruction not already 
found in the Bible. This was the Reformers' argument against both 
the radicals and the Catholics. The inspired Bible and the testi-
mony of the Holy Spirit became respectively the external and in-

--- Page 65 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 55 
ternal principles on which correct interpretation rested. It also 
made the Scriptures sufficient in themselves. 
Sole Scripture and the Creeds. The early formative period of 
the Reformation began with a personal "discovery" of the truth that 
man is "justified by faith alone." It was followed by a formula-
tive period in which the Christian faith sought to be purged of 
heretical teaching. In order to save the center of Christian the-
ology, confessional statements of faith were drawn up. It was, 
however, clearly understood that such statements should grow out 
of the Scriptures and continually be under their tutorage. It was 
further recognized that there is increased light as history moves 
on to consummation and that some facets of biblical truths may 
suddenly take on new significance. Any creedal statement, there-
fore, was only a relative authority, but the Scriptures were the 
absolute authority. The Bible was sufficient in itself, hence 
Scripture interprets Scripture, letting obscure passages be com-
pared and collated with less obscure passages. This common concept 
is well expressed in the First Basel Confession of Faith (1534). 
It concludes with this sentence: "We submit this our Confession 
to the judgment of the divine Scriptures, and hold ourselves ready, 
always thankfully to obey God and his Word if we should be correc-
ted out of said holy Scriptures."--Schaff, The Creeds of Christ-
endom, vol. 1, p. 387. Accordingly, the Bible for the Reformers 
was an unregulated regulator. The following early Adventist 
statements are in full accord with early Reformation thought: 
Christianity has a much broader meaning than many 
have hitherto given it. It is not a creed. It is the 
word of Him who liveth and abideth forever. It is a 
living, animating principle, that takes possession of 
mind, heart, motives, and the entire man. Christianity--
oh, that we might experience its operations! It is a 
vital, personal experience, that elevates and ennobles 
the whole man.--Ellen G. White, Testimonies to Ministers, 
pp. 421, 422. 
The Bible, and the Bible alone, is to be our creed, 
the sole bond of union.--Ellen G. White, Selected Mes-
sages, book 1, p. 416. 
Sole Scripture and the Canon. The churches of the Reformation 
on the one hand limited the sola scripture to the canonized books 
of the Bible and on the other hand emphasized the unity of the 
same. The Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England are rep-
resentative when they state: 
Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to

--- Page 66 ---
56 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor 
may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, 
that it should be believed as an article of the Faith, 
or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation.--
Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, vol. 3, p. 489. 
It is characteristic that Luther over and over refers to "all 
Scripture," "all of Holy Writ," and "the entire Bible," and appeals 
to "the constant and unanimous judgment of Scripture." Scripture 
is not against itself but "is in excellent agreement with itself 
and is uniformly consistent everywhere." 
One additional point should be mentioned. Having accepted 
the canonical Scriptures as authoritative, the Reformers always 
recognized that any theological conclusions should be drawn from 
the Hebrew OT and the Greek NT, which generally were placed for 
reference at the table when they had their disputations. 
Sola Scriptura and Catholicity. The relationship between 
sola scriptura and catholicity, which we define as faithfulness to 
the early ancient church in life and doctrine, was twofold. On 
the one hand the Reformers demonstrated that what they taught 
(based on sola scriptura as a constitutive norm of doctrine) had 
been held by the ancient church. On the other hand the Scriptures 
became also a corrective norm, because much in the traditions, the 
fathers and the councils were not rooted in the "Bible alone. ..." 
The Reformers sought to maintain a vital sense of continuity 
with the past. The early creeds were accepted by Luther not be-
cause they had been accepted by the fathers and the church but be-
cause he found them in conformity to the Word of God. Late in 1517 
he wrote some explanations to his Ninety-Five Theses: 
First, I testify that I desire to say or maintain 
absolutely nothing except, first of all, what is in the 
Holy Scriptures and can be maintained from them; and then 
what is in and from the writings of the church fathers 
and is accepted by the Roman Church and preserved both 
in the canons and the papal decrees.--Luther's Works, 
XXXI, 83. 
Luther considered the Scriptures the touchstone, the yard-
stick, to be used for the evaluation of the writings of the fathers 
and the decisions of the church. 
Sola Scriptura and Preaching. Before the Reformation a cler-
gyman's main performance was at the altar, but after the Reforma-
tion it was in the pulpit. Accordingly, his name was changed from

--- Page 67 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 57 
priest to preacher, gospeler, minister of the gospel. The preach-
ing of the Word was the basic function of the ordained ministry, 
and it grew out of the doctrine of solo scripture. The Reformers 
were great preachers of the Word. Luther left behind him more 
than 2,000 printed sermons. 
The Reformers' preaching was never a movement from men, from 
situations, or from problems to the text, but it always advanced 
from the text to men and problems. The sermons were basically 
expository, and they were subject to Scripture throughout; other-
wise, the truths of the doctrine of sole scripture could not be 
realized. The written word had to preserve the oral word--the 
proclamation--from error. Further, the Holy Spirit can work with 
preaching only when both are united in the solo scriptura prin-
ciple. 
If the Reformation era teaches us anything, it is that Chris-
tian theology, in order to be true to its task, must be biblical 
theology; likewise, Christian preaching must be biblical preaching. 
True is the famous dictum of William Chillingworth: "The Bible, I 
say, the Bible only, is the religion of Protestants." 
Summary of the Reformers' Hermeneutical Principles  
The Reformers' unified doctrine of sola scriptura dictated 
the common principles of hermeneutics, which may be listed as fol-
lows: 
A passage should first be understood in its literal or obvious 
(simple) meaning. 
The text should be studied in its context by means of the 
historicogrammatical method, which takes into consideration the 
conditions of the times and the people to whom the Scriptures were 
first written. The Hebrew and Greek texts of the OT and the NT 
should be consulted. 
Scripture is to be used to interpret Scripture, the canonical 
Scriptures being a self-sufficient authority in religious matters. 
The Christocentric rule, which makes Christ the focal point 
in the Bible, is to be applied. 
Understanding the correct relationship between law and gospel 
and the threefold usage of the law is basic to the interpretation 
of the Scriptures.

--- Page 68 ---
58 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The interpreter should be illuminated by the Holy Spirit and 
a personal cola fide and cola gratia experience. 
The significance of the Reformers' contribution to the study 
of the Bible is epitomized by F. W. Farrar. Speaking about Luther, 
he writes: "And he not only gave them the open Bible, but taught 
them and all the world how best it might be interpreted."--History 
of Interpretation, p. 323. 
Postreformation Developments  
Since the formative decades Protestant theology has passed 
through many phases and zigzag movements. It was God centered, 
man centered, and Christ centered. The feelings, the power of 
reason, and the moral values were singularly important in differ-
ent periods. There were great contrasts, such as intellectualism 
in contrast to emotionalism, transcendentalism versus immanence, 
the religion of divine sovereignty as against inward conscience. 
All together and each separately influenced in different ways dur-
ing various periods the Protestant concept of biblical interpre-
tation and authority. 
Protestant Orthodoxy  
During the latter half of the 16th and the early decades of 
the 17th centuries Protestantism entered a period of dogmatism, 
attempting to purge the Christian faith of all errors. The doc-
trinal controversies among the Protestant bodies as well as their 
common defense against Catholic beliefs, especially after they 
were defined at the Council of Trent, accentuated the need for 
confessional statements of faith. Thus the basis was laid for 
Protestant orthodoxy with its emphasis on correct doctrinal be-
liefs. In this necessary task the authority of the Bible as the 
inerrant Word of God was taken seriously. However, there developed 
within Protestantism a greater concern for the orthodoxy of the 
letter over against the piety of the heart. People were asked to 
believe statements of faith, but the faith they were meant to safe-
guard often took second place. The Bible was approached mainly as 
an arsenal of proof texts for Christian doctrines, and a mechanical 
inspiration of the Bible was endorsed. The Formula Consensus Hel-
vetica (1675) even asserted that the vowel points in the Hebrew 
text of the OT were as much inspired by God as the words of the 
Bible. This dogmatic approach resulted in coining the term Prot-
estant scholasticism. "Scholasticism . . . essentially means an 
intellectual temper which may invade any subject in any age; in 
religion, it is the spirit of law overbearing the spirit of the

--- Page 69 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 59 
Gospel."--Mackintosh, Types of Modern Theology: Schleiermacher to 
Barth, p. 9. 
Pietism 
Protestant scholasticism had assumed a rational spirit and an 
argumentative nature, resulting in religious formalism. Pietism, 
which had its beginning in Germany in the seventeenth century, 
sought to renew a living faith from a rigid and legalistic ortho-
doxy. The Pietists, generally, did not attack any of the doctrines 
of the Protestant system, but their emphasis on the personal ex-
perience of conversion and practical works of piety was a kind of 
protest of individualism against institutionalism and theological 
dogmatism. The conversion experience took on a certain normative 
role with respect to basic religious consciousness. Accordingly, 
all doctrines were not of the same value and importance to them. 
Such Pietist leaders as P. J. Spener and A. H. Francke sought to 
reduce the traditional doctrinal system to a few important doc-
trines, the measuring rod being their role in the act of conver-
sion and their influence on the practical religious life of the 
Christian. 
A hierarchical arrangement of Christian doctrines was at var-
iance with the fundamental tenets of Protestant orthodoxy. Here 
a doctrine had to be accepted because it came from God. To con-
sider some doctrines of less importance than others would therefore 
be to show contempt for the Giver. The Pietists approached their 
study of the Bible from an ethical and devotional point of view. 
Although this approach was necessary to counteract the negative 
influence of Protestant orthodoxy, its emphasis held the dangers 
that (1) the doctrinal structure of the Christian faith would be 
weakened, that (2) in the quest for a devotional interpretation 
the historical and literal meaning of Scripture passages would be 
obscured by typological and allegorical exegesis, and that (3) 
practical religious life rather than the Word of God would become 
the authority. 
One fruit of Pietism deserves notice in the valuable contri-
bution made to the history of exegesis by J. A. Bengel (1687-1752), 
who published a Greek NT in 1734 and was the first to stress the 
genealogical method, namely, the classification of NT manuscripts 
into families on the basis of evident kinship, thus introducing a 
new principle for the authority of a given biblical passage. He 
also renounced the idea of mechanical inspiration, and as a true 
Pietist he rejected the concept of the Bible as a collection of 
doctrinal truths. Accordingly, his biblical studies were directed 
toward a continuous exegesis of the entire Bible, which for him

--- Page 70 ---
60 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
was a divine record of God's acting in history for the purpose of 
man's salvation rather than an exposition of doctrines. 
Theological Rationalism 
The characteristic notes of modern thought had their beginning 
early in the 17th century. They may be listed as (1) refusal to 
be bound by tradition in any form, (2) emphasis on reason, and (3) 
acceptance of the method followed in natural science as the norm 
for all investigation, including Christianity. In biblical studies 
it meant rejection of the authoritative sola scriptura principle 
and affirmation of an individualistic spiritual independence an-
chored in reason as the ultimate norm of religious truth. Phil-
osophy was challenging the claim of biblical authority in the name 
of reason through the writings of Rene Descartes (1596-1650), 
Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), Baruch Spinoza (1632-1677), and John 
Locke (1632-1704). 
In the thinking of Descartes the beginning of all knowledge 
was doubt. Consequently, he raised doubt regarding the authority 
of Scripture. All concepts had to be proved with the certainty of 
mathematical demonstration. In this philosophical framework Hobbes 
suggested methods for critical study of the OT and challenged the 
Mosaic authorship of the first five books of the Bible. Spinoza 
disputed the validity of the miracles recorded in the Bible and 
claimed that the Scriptures should be treated as any other book. 
Locke asserted in his Reasonableness of Christianity that the mes-
sage of the Bible cannot be contrary to reason but must be in ac-
cord with natural religion; accordingly, he had little regard for 
mystery. The Deists (a group of English intelligentsia who emerged 
during the latter part of the 16th and the 17th centuries) made 
use of questions raised by natural science and the arguments of 
the philosophers. 
The aim of the Deists was to find a religion that all would 
want to recognize, a "natural" religion, which might serve as a 
common denominator for a critical examination of supernaturalism 
in any form. Significantly the subtitle of the Deistic Bible, by 
Matthew Tindal, reads: "The Gospel a Republication of the Religion 
of Nature." If Christianity teaches more than is.contained in 
natural religion, the additions belong to the realm of supersti-
tion or to corruption of true religion. Perfect in itself, natural 
religion cannot be augmented by revelation, making reason man's 
ultimate guide and challenging the traditional view of the author-
ity of the Bible and the redemptive uniqueness of Christianity. 
In Germany the counterpart of English Deism was found in the

--- Page 71 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 61 
Enlightenment, as the group named itself. After the period of 
Pietism during the 18th century this movement shaped a new reli-
gious and philosophical atmosphere, in which the individual con-
science became the ultimate norm in deciding religious truth. All 
through the history of Christian thought there has been the problem 
of right relationship between revelation and reason. Emphasis in 
the one or the other direction has a bearing on the principles of 
exegesis. 
In the historical development of Rationalism the accent was 
placed more and more on reason, which gradually became the ultimate 
authority. In the first phase of Rationalism, the Bible was to 
settle religious matters but reason was a very important guide. 
However, even in this form it was easy to allow reason to create 
concepts that become a priori in one's exegetical endeavors. A 
rationalistic approach to Scripture was apparent in the 16th cen-
tury among the Socinians with their stress on the humanity of.  
Christ and their denial of the doctrine of the Trinity. The fall 
of man was replaced by a mere inclination to evil, and the satis-
faction theory of the atonement was considered absurd and immoral. 
In other words, the basic soteriological and christological facts 
of Christianity, as in the time of the apostle Paul, became a stum-
bling block for one's reason. With its rationalizing impulses 
Socinianism appeared as Unitarianism in England, where it was 
strengthened by the Deistic movement. After the decline of the 
latter, Unitarianism lingered within many Protestant churches in 
the English-speaking world and distorted the soteriological and 
christological scriptural passages. During the early decades of 
its history, Seventh-day Adventism was not exempted from this 
rationalistic influence, but was rescued to fidelity to scriptural 
authority by the writings of Ellen G. White, especially those pub-
lished during the last two decades of the 19th century. 
The real founder of theological Rationalism was Christian 
Wolff (1679-1754). He did not deny a Christian revelation but re-
quired it to be in accord with natural religion. A more extreme 
Rationalism was expressed by Hermann Reimarus (1694-1768), who 
denied special revelation. The Deistic concepts are fully ex-
pressed by him, for he made natural religion the only criterion 
for Christianity. Accordingly, he sought to undo historical 
Christianity and the revelatory authority of the Bible. G. E. 
Lessing (1729-1781) in his book Education of the Human Race sub-
mitted the theory that the Bible had been helpful in past stages 
of human development, but mankind, which now found itself in its 
manhood, was to be guided by reason. Judaism and early Christian-
ity were consigned to an inferior and past period of human devel-
opment.

--- Page 72 ---
62 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
To the Rationalists Christ was no more than a moral teacher 
and an ethical example, as His life and death were nothing else 
than historical events. Everything that was to develop within 
liberal theology and destructive biblical criticism in the 19th 
century had been initiated by Rationalism. 
The Wesleyan Revival  
In the life and preaching of John Wesley (1703-1791) Deism 
was effectively contested. The best of the German Pietist move-
ment is seen in the Wesleyan revival, which met the need of society 
and the church. The power of the gospel made itself evident in 
the lives of men and women challenging the spiritually barren dis-
putations of the Deists. The enthronement of human reason and the 
belittlement of the divine authority of the Scriptures were com-
bated by a preaching anchored in the belief that God's Word is 
absolute authority. The veracity of the Bible was confirmed by 
the witness of the Holy Spirit. 
Wesley was more orthodox in his view of the Bible than Spener 
and Francke and allowed no separation between Scripture and Christ. 
No matter how much he emphasized the conversion experience, the 
biblical note remained strong. He was not an innovator in the 
history of exegesis, but he read the Bible as orthodox Christians 
generally did in the Church of England. 
The Wesleyan revival demonstrated anew that in man's search 
for God the gospel "is the saving power of God for everyone who 
has faith" (Rom 1:16, NEB), recognizing that "the world failed to 
find him [God] by its wisdom," but God "chose to save those who 
had faith by the folly of the Gospel" (1 Cor 1:21, NEB). Here 
lies the highest proof for biblical authority. Wesley revived the 
material and formal principles of true Protestant hermeneutics, 
namely, "by faith alone," and "the Bible alone." 
The Wesleyan emphasis on sanctification (which also character-
ized Calvinism and Puritanism) plays an important role as a per-
sonal quality of the exegete. A progressive biblical understand-
ing depends on the interpreter's obedience to light already given. 
Christ said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the 
doctrine" (Jn 7:17, KJV). 
Looking at the Wesleyan revival in historical perspective, 
it should be noticed that whereas German Rationalism followed the 
age of Pietism, in England the situation was the opposite. When 
the 19th century opened, the religious life in England was marked 
by a note of spiritual fervor, which was not the case in Germany.

--- Page 73 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 63 
The latter was in no small degree a factor in making Germany the 
mainspring of liberal theology. 
Nineteenth Century Liberal Protestantism 
A twofold legacy was passed on to the 19th century, namely, 
Pietism and Rationalism. Religiously they took new forms. The 
subjective side of Pietism was developed to the point that a per-
son's existential experience within the framework of religious 
feelings and intuition became the seat of religious authority as 
cold reason had been in Rationalism. Rationalism, which had been 
occupied partly with criticism of the Bible, now concentrated its 
main effort on the same. With reason no longer the center for 
religious authority, any result higher criticism might arrive at 
could not be embarrassing to or a disturbing influence on a per-
son's religious experience. Thus basically the latter was made 
independent of historical research, science, and philosophy but 
also of biblical authority as understood by orthodox Protestantism. 
A new distinction was made between faith and knowledge. 
Before the turn of the 19th century Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) 
criticized religion that moved within the bounds of reason only, 
but it was Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768-1834) who, more than any-
one else, changed the theological climate and became the founder 
of modern liberal Protestantism. Having been educated in both 
pietistic and rationalistic circles, he brought together the two 
tendencies, and under the influence of Kant he gave theology a new 
base, as defined above. 
Schleiermacher does not begin with God's attributes as the 
great first cause but with the feeling within people of absolute 
dependence on a power outside themselves. All advances in religion 
are greater and greater manifestations of the human feelings 
(GefWil) or the consciousness of the immanent God. Therefore sin 
is not, as with the Reformers, a rebellion against the divine will 
but a disturbance of the harmony between man's natural powers, 
which hinders the assertion within him of his relation to God. 
A person's God concept expresses his religion (and specifi-
cally his soteriology) more clearly than anything else, and has a 
direct bearing on his view and interpretation of the Bible. The 
Reformers believed in a transcendent God, who is absolute, personal, 
and holy, the Creator and Sustainer of the universe and the Re-
deemer of mankind. This makes an objective God-to-man revelation 
necessary (as opposed to a man-originated subjective concept of 
revelation). Transcendency and objective revelation are correla-

--- Page 74 ---
64 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
tive ideas. In Deism God was pushed far back into the universe, 
leaving this world and man to be ruled by inherited laws and man's 
reason. Here no revelation was needed; on the contrary, it would 
destroy the God concept. The doctrine of the immanence of God 
taught by Schleiermacher created a complete new orientation in 
Protestant thought, and pressed to its extreme led to Pantheism, 
which also flourished in the 19th century. 
The concept of an immanent God makes an objective revelation 
unnecessary. All advances in religion as seen in the soul of the 
individual, in society, in history, and in nature are in a true 
sense revelations. This God concept accounts for the outlook of 
liberal theologians and the characteristics of liberal Protestant-
ism as, for example, the humanity of Christ, the dignity of man, 
and the optimism of social progress. The immanent God was at work 
not only in man and society but also in nature, thus the evolution-
ary theory was in accord with the new Protestantism. In the light 
of all this it is understandable that biblical authority became 
subordinate to the "revelations" of the immanent God. 
While Schleiermacher emphasized the Gefilhl (human feelings) 
as the seat for our God consciousness, Albert Ritschl (1822-1889) 
considered Christianity to be based on value judgment; the ethical 
side, or moral value, of Christianity was stressed. Thus, not the 
feeling or the intellect but the will was of paramount importance. 
Here moral consciousness is the seat of authority. An important 
Ritschlian was the great church historian Adolf von Harnack (1851-
1930), who exercised great influence in liberalism. In the book 
What Is Christianity? he urged a return to the religion of Jesus, 
not the religion about Jesus. That religion is very simple, and 
it is found in the synoptic Gospels after they have been purged of 
the mythological framework of the first century, as, for example, 
apocalypticism, demons, and miracles. In his monumental work 
History of Dogma he maintained that the religion of Jesus had been 
obscured and distorted by hellenization (reflected in the Gospel 
of John and most of the epistles), Christian dogmatism, and insti-
tutional Christianity. Harnack was in great sympathy with Marcion, 
of the 2nd century. He reduced the biblical authority to the per-
sonality of Christ and His simple teaching of the fatherhood of 
God and His kingdom, the infinite value of the human soul, and the 
law of love and higher righteousness as exemplified in the life 
of Jesus. 
The magnitude of liberal Protestantism can best be perceived 
when seen in the light of its rejection by Karl Barth (1886-1968). 
As Schleiermacher created a new epoch by stressing the immanence 
of God, Karl Barth became the great theologian of the 20th century 
by reestablishing God's transcendency, and a "new realism" of the

--- Page 75 ---
Reformation and Postreformation Eras 	 65 
Bible followed. Barth was called neo-orthodox by liberal theolo-
gians; however, his biblical "realism" is not that of 16th-century 
Protestantism. 
In the present discussion of immanence versus transcendency 
it becomes crystal clear that a true God concept is a basic premise 
for a sound understanding of biblical authority and for correct 
hermeneutic. The issues presented and the picture drawn of Prot-
estant thought with special reference to biblical authority will 
be clarified further in the light of the history of biblical 
studies during the last two centuries. 
READING LIST  
Barth, Karl. Protestant Thought: From Rousseau to Ritschl. New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1959. 
Dillenberger, John, and Welch, Claude. Protestant Christianity. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1954. 
Farrar, F. W. History of Interpretation. Grand Rapids, Mich.: 
Baker Book House, 1961. 
Greenslade, S. L., ed. The Cambridge History of the Bible. 
Cambridge: University Press, 1963. 
Hordern, William. A Layman's Guide to Protestant Theology. 
Rev. ed. London: Collier-Macmillan, Ltd., 1969. 
Mackintosh, Hugh Ross. Types of Modern Theology: Schleiermacher 
to Barth. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1937. 
Pelikan, Jaroslay. Luther's Works, Companion Volume: Luther the 
Expositor. Saint Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1959. 
Ramm, Bernard. The Pattern of Religious Authority. Grand Rapids, 
Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1968 
	 . Protestant Biblical Interpretation. Rev. ed. Grand 
Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1956. 
Wood, James D. The Interpretation of the Bible: A Historical In-
troduction. London: Gerald Duckworth and Co., Ltd., 1958. 
Wood, Skevington A. The Principles of Biblical Interpretation. 
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Pub. House, 1967.

--- Page 76 ---
In 1971 Elder E. Edward Zinke became 
research assistant and assistant sec-
retary of the Biblical Research Com-
mittee of the General Conference of 
Seventh-day Adventists, Washington, 
D.C. During the previous four years 
he both served as a pastor in the Ar-
kansas-Louisiana Conference and com-
pleted, in 1970, the Master of Divinity 
degree at the Seventh-day Adventist 
Theological Seminary at Andrews Univer-
sity. He was ordained in 1973 at 
Takoma Park, Maryland.

--- Page 77 ---
5. Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies  
E. EDWARD ZINKE 
Biblical Research Department 
General Conference of SDA 
Biblical studies in the past two centuries were concerned 
largely with determining the method by which the Bible received 
its present content and form. This concern was motivated and 
guided by philosophical presuppositions based largely on naturalism 
and evolutionism. 
This paper purposes to trace the hermeneutical principles 
developed by recent biblical studies, noting particularly their 
presuppositions in the light of those outlined in chapter 1--those 
touching on the transcendence of God, His activities in human his-
tory, and His objective self-revelation in the Bible. 
As we have already seen, diverse interpretations of the Bible 
are largely the result of the philosophical presuppositions of the 
interpreter and his attitudes toward revelation-inspiration and 
the resultant authority of Scripture. Because presuppositions of 
19th century liberalism continue to influence the methods used in 
contemporary biblical studies, it will be helpful to review 
briefly their presentation in the previous chapter, beginning with 
the tracing of some of their main roots. 
Major Roots of 19th Century Liberalism 
Protestant liberalism developed in the 18th and 19th centu-
ries, in part as a reaction against the rigidity of Protestant 
orthodoxy with its narrow dictational concept of inspiration. 
Liberalism then went to the other extreme by rejecting all con-
cepts of an objective revelation. 
Protestant liberalism had its beginnings in several streams 
of thought. Among them was rationalism, which attempted to reduce 
Christianity to a religion of reason rather than of revelation. 
Another line of thought came from Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), who 
as a part of the "enlightenment" reacted on the one hand against

--- Page 78 ---
68 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Protestant orthodoxy and on the other against rationalism, placing 
his emphasis on the voice of conscience for the discovery of truths 
that cannot be seen either from the viewpoint of "pure reason or 
from divine revelation." Religion for him was closely identified 
with morality. 
Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768-1834), probably the most influ-
ential theologian of Protestant liberalism, sought the essence of 
religion in general and that of Christianity in particular in 
experience. Religion for him was based on intuitive feeling rather 
than on objective revelation or dogma. The subjective element 
became dominant. 
Empiricism or historicism contributed to the methodology of 
biblical studies in Protestant liberalism, the methods of strict 
historical observation. Another contribution was philosophical 
idealism, which in G. W. F. Hegel (1770-1831) reaffirmed that 
reality is reasonable and described the process by which the imma-
nent "absolute spirit" attained self-awareness in mankind, namely, 
by way of an evolutionistic process in which pure reason (thesis) 
is subjected negatively to actual experience (antithesis), which 
results in a new reality (synthesis) as a result of the opposing 
elements (thesis and antithesis) acting on each other inIthe flux 
of history. 
Up to this time theology had dominated the scholarly scene 
even in secular studies. But now such categories as reason and 
experience were dominating both secular studies and theology. 
Crucial Presuppositions of 19th Century Liberalism 
As can be seen from this brief sketch of some historical roots 
of Protestant liberalism, there are within that movement many 
diverse elements drawn from the thinking of different individuals 
and schools of thought. We shall attempt a characterization of 
their crucial presuppositions. 
The basic a priori tenet of liberalism was that the origin 
and development of the Bible was the same as that of any other 
human document and thus it must be studied and interpreted in 
accordance with the standards of scholarship in science, philosophy, 
and other disciplines. The Bible, then, was to be interpreted in 
the same way as any other literature, such as the Greek classics. 
In the place of the Bible, the liberal outlook preferred the scien-
tific method and the ethical standards of educated people as the 
standard for faith and doctrine. For example, because Reformation 
understanding of the biblical concepts of sin and salvation offended

--- Page 79 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 69 
the moral sensibilities of the liberals, these doctrines were 
rejected by them. (Sinfulness often was regarded as a lack of 
knowledge or insight, and salvation as simply the supplying of 
this lack of understanding.) 
The concept of a transcendent deity was substituted, a priori, 
totally by a concept of God's immanence. The idea that God acts 
in any supernatural or miraculous way in the history of mankind 
was rejected. If the miraculous in the classics must be rejected 
by scientific judgment so it must be in the Scripture. In either 
case let it be treated as folklore or mythology. 
Religious liberalism likewise rejected the concepts of 
revelation-inspiration, which asserted that God had revealed Him-
self objectively and normatively to man in Scripture. Authority 
of individual thought or experience was substituted for authority 
of the Word of God. Thought or experience was not evaluated by 
Scripture. Each had its own value as being individual, a manifes-
tation of the divine Spirit immanent in all things. Biblical 
writings had value only as a record of remarkable manifestations 
of religious experience. In the end God was dethroned and man 
became a law unto his own thinking or feeling self. Reason or 
experience became autonomous and was placed above scriptural 
revelation. The doctrinal content of the Bible was no longer 
binding for faith or practice. 
Rejection of the revelatory aspects of the Bible caused not 
only denial of its normative aspect but also disregard for its 
unity. This result effected a method of study that tended to 
fragment the Bible. 
Protestant liberalism studied the religion of Israel and the 
form and content of the Bible on the basis of the human-progress 
theory. As a result, the biblical sequence was rearranged to pre-
sent a neat evolution of religious thought. The substitution of 
the wholly immanent God for the transcendent God, with its impli-
cations for revelation-inspiration and acceptance of the principle 
of the progress of man, gave rise to the "history-of-religions" 
school. This system of thought no longer recognized the histori-
cal uniqueness of Christianity but, rather, saw it as one religion 
among other religions. Whereas this school recognized Christianity 
as the highest manifestation of religion, it also considered the 
possibility of its being superseded. Religious truth, therefore, 
could best be studied comparatively by placing the Bible alongside 
all other books of religion, poetry, history, and experiential or 
rational truth. 
Liberalism tended to disregard the historical events in which

--- Page 80 ---
70 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
God acted on behalf of mankind. The uniqueness of Christianity 
came to be seen in its profound understanding of God; of man, in 
his relationship with other men; of the moral example of Jesus; 
and the effect of these concepts upon the progress of society, 
rather than in its portrayal of God's activities in history. The 
Bible was interpreted by a thoroughgoing historical-critical 
method, not so much for the purpose of painting its historical 
backdrop as to explain the development of its content and form 
without recognition of the guiding hand of God. 
In liberalism the origin of Scripture was explained on the 
basis of the evolution of religion, buffeted by such social con-
ditions as created a climate favorable to the development of 
specific theological concepts. The task of the interpreter, then, 
was not to study God's message to mankind but to understand the 
historical conditions that supposedly had molded the Scriptures--
the surrounding religion, culture, and political units--not with 
the intent of clarifying the context in which God revealed Himself 
but to understand the process by which religious concepts in the 
Hebrew culture and early Christian faith were borrowed, restruc-
tured, brought together, and purified. 
Liberalism's method of studying Scripture in the 19th century 
was based on the presuppositions and categories of contemporary 
philosophical movements. Unfortunately this forcing of the Bible 
into various philosophical frameworks distorted its message and 
reduced its declared power to transform human lives. There have 
been reactions to the excesses of the liberal position, even from 
within liberalism itself. Stronger reactions have come from the 
neoorthodox group, as represented by Karl Barth (1886-1968) (see 
the previous chapter) and more so from evangelical and fundamen-
talist groups. Nevertheless, the presuppositions and concepts 
concerning the nature of God, religion, and the Bible as generally 
held by Protestant liberalism have had a major effect on the fast-
developing method of that category of biblical studies known as 
biblical criticism. 
Biblical Criticism 
The method of biblical criticism is the application of modern 
literary and historical-critical methods to the study of the Bible 
to establish, as far as possible, the manner and date of its com-
position, including its sources, authorship, and literary develop-
ment. One of the primary questions asked by biblical criticism 
is: By what process and at what time did this passage or book 
receive its present content and form?

--- Page 81 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 71 
For the layman the term "biblical criticism" may give the 
connotation of depreciation of the Word of God, but its specific 
intent is rather appreciation through a fuller understanding of 
its literary history and message. At the same time, this appre-
ciation is not concerned to lead readers to conviction, faith, 
and action but simply to discriminatory understanding of the peo-
ple, culture, history, and religion from which the book arose. 
Thus the basic motives of biblical criticism are similar to the 
motives of other disciplines; for example, music criticism, which 
attempts to develop appreciation of a particular type or piece of 
music; and historical criticism, which attempts to reconstruct a 
historical event. 
Historically, biblical criticism has developed along several 
interrelated and interdependent lines. Higher criticism attempts 
to deal with the literary history and meaning of the text through 
such disciplines as literary criticism, form criticism, and tra-
dition criticism. Literary, or source, criticism attempts to dis-
cover the documents or sources presumed to lie behind the present 
record. Form criticism attempts to discern the structure and the 
life setting that required or produced a given kind of structure. 
Tradition criticism considers both the history of the development 
of a passage and the final editorial work on it. 
The questions asked by biblical criticism are: How are we 
to explain what is contained in the final biblical record? What 
is the psychological framework in which this sort of writing would 
be feasible? What are the anthropological and sociological forces 
that would lead to the formation of a particular concept or to the 
use of a particular literary style? What are the molding forces 
of the literary style? What is the matrix of political and histori-
cal forces which would cause this or that interpretation to be 
placed on an event in history? Why does the record have the theme 
it has? Is it advocating a political or a religious cause, or has 
it been influenced by any combination of such forces? What part 
does this document play in the history of man's religion as he 
moves toward a more mature religion? 
Developing Stages of Biblical Criticism 
17th and 18th Centuries  
The 17th and 18th centuries saw the formation of that aspect 
of biblical criticism known as literary criticism. Men such as 
Hugo Grotius (1583-1645), Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), Benedict 
Spinoza (1632-1677), and Richard Simon (1638-1712) began to lay 
the groundwork for a study of Scripture that analyzed and scruti-
nized the Bible just as one would study any other literature. For

--- Page 82 ---
72 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
example, the concept of Hobbes that the Bible is not itself the 
revelation of God, but that it merely contains the record of men 
who received that revelation led to the study of Scripture as a 
merely human book. Simon, arguing from the standpoint of the 
authority of church tradition, stated that the Christian faith 
could be sustained without the Scriptural record. As the result 
of such thinking men began to doubt the Mosaic authorship of the 
Pentateuch, seeing these books as rather the result of a long 
process of compilation and redaction (the work of many editors). 
Old Testament  
Jean Astruc (1684-1766), a French physician, by pulling 
together the observations of many before him provided the basis 
for the documentary theory of Pentateuchal composition. Astruc 
(predecessor of source criticism) claimed that Moses in writing 
Genesis drew on two major sources. To substantiate this claim he 
pointed to (1) the distribution of the Hebrew names for deity, 
Elohim and Yahweh, (2) the repetition of similar stories, and 
(3) what he considered to be chronological confusion in the book 
of Genesis. 
The movement in OT studies toward the humanistic insight which 
claimed that the OT should be subjected to the same principles of 
careful scrutiny as were applied to secular writings was crystal-
lized by J. G. Eichhorn (1752-1827), who brought together in his 
Introduction to the Old Testament the results of OT criticism to 
that time. He rejected concepts of divine inspiration and authority 
of the Scriptures on the basis that the OT displayed more of the 
flavor of the Hebrew national literature than would be expected of 
a divinely inspired book. He extended the source or literary 
critical concept of Astruc by pointing out that underlying sources 
could also be discovered in other portions of Scripture by giving 
close attention to diversities of literary style and by identifi-
cation of words or phrases characteristic of documents previously 
categorized. 
New Testament  
The influences of rationalism and deism were strongly felt 
during the formative period of NT criticism. The antisupernatural-
ism of the 18th century dominated the scene to the extent that 
even the miracles of Christ were considered to be superstitious 
wonder tales. Liberal Protestant thought was developed largely in 
German universities, which being rather free from church control 
became advocates of the "enlightenment." At the same time

--- Page 83 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 73 
pietism was working within the German churches to break down 
orthodox dogmatism and to inject religious life into formalized 
religion. 
The works of H. S. Reimarus (1694-1768), published anony-
mously after his death, brought rationalistic and deistic philoso-
phy to bear heavily on the study of the NT. Reimarus found faith 
and reason to be irreconcilable. For him the real Jesus of history 
was not the Jesus described in the NT writings. The supernatural 
events in the life of Jesus and the portrayal of His divine nature 
were to be accounted for on the basis that the disciples falsi-
fied the story rather than on the basis of actual historical fact. 
Although Reimarus' extreme positions have been accepted by only a 
few, nonetheless he enunciated what are still considered to be 
the major problems in a reconstruction of the life of Jesus. 
19th Century Biblical Criticism 
The 19th century mood was dominated by the development of 
the natural sciences, the latter half of the century by Darwin's 
theory of evolution particularly. Man's feeling that he had be-
come autonomous in his study of nature led him to a greater feel-
ing of autonomy in the realm of religion. As indicated earlier, 
the predominant philosopher was Hegel and the most influential 
liberal theologian was Friedrich Schleiermacher. 
Old Testament  
As a result of the increasing influences of philosophic 
approaches to critical biblical studies, there was by the middle 
of the 19th century general acceptance of the theory of a second 
Isaiah and the dating of much of the biblical material late in 
the history of Israel. The book of Daniel, for example, was now 
firmly assigned to the 2d century B.C. A number of source hypothe-
ses were introduced that built models of biblical interpretation 
dependent on sources, compilers, and redactors (editors) acting 
over a long period of time as the basis for the final stage in 
which the Bible now appears. 
As a result of the work of Karl H. Graf (1815-1869), Abraham 
Kuenen (1828-1891), and others a hypothesis emerged recognizing 
four sources in the Pentateuch with placement of the priestly 
source after the Babylonian exile and reconstructing Israel's 
history in accordance with such a late dating. Julius Wellhausen 
(1844-1918) became the most noted and brilliant exponent of this 
theory and the most influential in winning its acceptance.

--- Page 84 ---
74 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Wellhausen, working on the foundation of literary criticism, 
added the dimension of a historical criticism based on evolution-
istic philosophy. The history of the religion of Israel was seen 
in the light of the development of a natural religion rather than 
a revealed religion. The influences at play were the evolution of 
man's religion, modified and redefined in terms of the Hegelian 
concept of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. Thus, the portions 
of the Pentateuch that demonstrated supposedly more advanced reli-
gious characteristics had to be dated at a later period of history. 
This dating resulted in the claim that the patriarchs, and even 
Moses himself (if they even existed), were not monotheists, and 
that the documents referring to monotheism early in the history 
of Israel were the result of theological and literary activity 
after the Exile. Even Israel's contact with the Canaanite reli-
gions was seen as a factor in Israel's development of monotheism. 
According to the Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commentary, vol. 
5, pp. 151, 152, the Graf-Wellhausen theory consists of the fol-
lowing scheme: 
The Bible writer called Jahvist (J), a citizen of 
the southern kingdom of Judah, wrote his source material, 
among which, for example, are the patriarchal stories 
from Abraham to the Exodus, in the middle of the 9th 
century B.C. A century later the writer called Elohist 
(E), living in the northern kingdom of Israel, wrote 
his account. These two documents were cleverly com-
bined into one book, JE, by a redactor or editor (RJE) 
about 650 B.C. In 621 B.C. the book of Deuteronomy 
(D) was produced, although not in the form we know it. 
This book was worked over by another redactor (RD) 
about 550 B.C. Between the years 500 and 450 B.C. a 
priestly writer (P) wrote the legal and religious parts 
of the Pentateuch, which were then incorporated into 
the other books of a presumed Mosaic origin by another 
redactor (RP), who did his final work of editing about 
400 B.C. or a little later. Since that time, according 
to the theory, the Pentateuch has not experienced 
appreciable modification. 
Wellhausen himself had little to add to the critical conclu-
sions of his predecessors. Yet his work as an able spokesman was 
a climax in the critical investigations of liberalism. He had 
brought together a system that was both simple and "scientific," 
and upon it many scholars have built in applying those principles 
to every portion of the OT. Although there have been reactions 
by evangelicals against this scheme, and even by liberals against 
its excesses, the major results of Wellhausen's studies are given 
abiding value by many.

--- Page 85 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 75 
A major presupposition of the literary critical method is 
well stated by J. Coert Rylaarsdam, editor of the Fortress Press 
series on OT biblical criticism: "This movement assumed that the 
production of Scripture was conditioned historically not only by 
the fact that it had combined documents with a prior history of 
their own but also that wider movements in human life had influ-
enced their contents. Implicit questions about revelation and 
inspiration of Scripture were made more pressing."--Literary 
Criticism of the Old Testament, p. iv. This major presupposition 
has been a standing one with the majority of critical biblical 
scholars to the present time. 
The following presuppositions, also found in other areas of 
critical biblical scholarship, have crucial implications for con-
servative biblical studies: (1) A widespread skepticism regard-
ing the trustworthiness of the biblical accounts that narrate 
earlier, noncontemporaneous events; (2) the tacit assumption 
that the culture and religion of ancient peoples, including Israel, 
evolved gradually from early and primitive forms to later and 
developed ones, thus assuming unilinear evolution; and (3) an 
a priori rejection of all miraculous or supernatural elements, 
which are explained away in natural ways, if at all possible. 
New Testament  
During the 19th century, as in the case of the OT, NT studies 
were generally controlled by antisupernaturalistic assumptions. 
An illustration of the mood of the time was liberalism's quest for 
"the historical Jesus." It was felt that there was a radical dif-
ference between the Jesus described by the NT and the "real" Jesus 
of history. By a careful analysis of the Gospels it was argued 
that the NT church's fanciful claims regarding Jesus--for the pur-
pose of providing a rationale for her existence--could be laid 
aside so that the acutal facts of the life and character of Jesus 
could be ascertained. Such reconstruction attempts were made by 
D. F. Strauss (1808-1874), who reduced the historical Jesus to a 
mere Jewish wiseman, by F. C. Baur (1792-1860), who saw the history 
of Christianity through the philosophical principle of thesis, 
antithesis, synthesis (where the thesis was a primitive Jewish 
concept in which Jesus was only a human teacher, the antithesis 
was the Pauline concept of the supernatural Jesus, and the 
synthesis was the early church concept of the dual nature of Jesus), 
and in the extreme by Bruno Bauer (1809-1882), who denied the 
historical existence of Jesus, and Wilhelm Wrede (1859-1906), who 
stated that Jesus never thought of Himself as the Messiah (a con-
cept still widely accepted).

--- Page 86 ---
76 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Those seeking the "historical Jesus" tried to explain on 
"scientific" grounds the events in the life of Christ, or to pic-
ture Him as an individual who received a greater than usual, 
though not unique, measure of spiritual power. The result was 
that the "historical Jesus" was little more than the ideal man of 
19th century liberalism. 
Albert Schweitzer's book Quest of the Historical Jesus, which 
came early in the 20th century, marks the end of liberalism's 
voluminous search. Schweitzer (1875-1965) maintained that Jesus 
cannot be separated from the eschatological teachings attributed 
to Him by the Gospels. Schweitzer, in fact, depicted Jesus as a 
radical eschatologist who went so far as to precipitate His own 
death, thinking that it would bring about His own second coming 
and the kingdom of God. Schweitzer's extreme interpretation, 
known as "consistent eschatology," although modified, is still 
influential in critical NT studies. 
20th Century Biblical Studies  
Forces Preparing for Change 
As biblical criticism entered the 20th century, there were 
forces preparing it for change. One of these was inherent within 
literary criticism itself. The attempt to discover sources be-
hind the biblical material became such an obsession to some that 
they sought the sources behind the sources behind the sources. 
Reactions to these excesses created a climate in which literary 
criticism itself could be scrutinized. 
Archaeology had produced new data on the historical and 
linguistic backgrounds of the Bible. This new information at 
times called into question the results of previous literary criti-
cal studies. Although many of its positions were thus modified, 
literary criticism in general was by no means making a return to 
orthodoxy. Even though it was beginning to take a more careful 
look at itself, biblical criticism was still operating on the 
basic presupposition that the Bible must be interpreted and 
explained on the same bases as any other literature. 
Literary criticism had also raised a number of questions for 
which it could not provide acceptable answers. For example, 
although there was general agreement that the Pentateuch was built 
from four sources, there was disagreement as to which portions 
belonged to which sources. There were also questions as to 
whether these sources themselves were based on other sources; and 
if so, whether the underlying sources could be detected. There 
were questions about the role of the redactors in the final

--- Page 87 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 77 
edition of the Pentateuch and whether their role could be clearly 
determined. 
Form Criticism of the Old Testament  
Hermann Gunkel (1862-1932) thought that a new approach would 
be necessary to the literary history of the OT. This new approach 
involved the study of comparative religions and form criticism. 
Gunkel's work rested on the presupposition that much of the OT 
literature developed first of all in an oral form as folk litera-
ture--just as similar types of literature had supposedly developed 
in other cultures. He was thus interested in trying to set up 
categories of types or genres (the hymn, the blessing, the oath, 
the legend, or the lament) of biblical literature in order to note 
the influences of other religions and cultures on them and to 
discover the setting that produced a particular genre. (A modern 
example of a genre would be the rather fixed format of a business 
letter.) 
Gunkel was interested in conjectural study of the preliterary 
and oral stages behind the final literary works that make up the 
OT. He also concentrated on the particular setting or Sitz im 
Leben out of which a particular literary type or genre originated. 
(The Sitz im Leben is the situation, such as the school, the cul-
tic activities, the home, or the customs of royalty, which pro-
duced and maintained respective literary types--this, more than 
the historical period.) In doing so, Gunkel also compared the 
genres of Hebrew literature with the cultic and mythological motifs 
of the religions of Egypt and Mesopotamia in order to determine 
whether and how Israel was indebted to and also reacted against 
these religions. 
In addition to the form or structure and "setting in life" 
of each genre, Gunkel also sought the special intention or func-
tion of each genre for the original author, community, and collec-
tor or redactor, and the particular mood or tone appropriate to 
the genre as well as its content, which he felt was similar 
through the genre. In establishing form criticism, Gunkel opened 
up and outlined a discipline that has contributed to the develop-
ment of both OT and NT studies. 
Among those who have followed Gunkel in OT form criticism is 
Sigmund Mowinckel (1884- 	 ). Both Gunkel and Mowinckel made 
their primary contributions on the book of Psalms. The emphasis 
of Mowinckel, however, differed from that of Gunkel in that the 
latter considered the Psalms to be essentially personal and pri-
vate compositions. He was therefore more interested in the thought 
of the author than in the cultic setting in which the Psalm

--- Page 88 ---
78 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
supposedly was used. Mowinckel, on the other hand, assumed that 
the Psalms were written specifically for their role in ceremonial 
worship rather than as a means of expressing the experience of 
an individual. He was more interested, therefore, in determining 
the setting in which he thought a particular form was used and 
the role the form played in that setting. Mowinckel has thus 
conjectured numerous stereotyped settings in the life of Israel, 
such as a New Year festival or an enthronement festival. 
An illustration of form criticism will be taken from G. E. 
Mendenhall's study of the covenant. Mendenhall (1916- 	 ) dis-
covered a supposed parallel between the form of the Hittite 
suzerainty treaty and the form of the Decalogue. This parallelism, 
for Mendenhall, explained the unity "of such a diverse group as 
Israel." Others have used this parallelism to the extent that 
they have built a covenant theology based on the Hittite treaty 
form and life setting rather than on the OT. 
What is of interest to us is that the basic presupposition of 
OT form criticism is that the Bible must be studied on the same 
bases as any other literature since its origin is supposedly the 
same as that of any other literature. Rylaarsdam has indicated 
that form criticism presupposes that the people of Israel during 
their history contributed to the making of the Bible by virtue of 
their having had a communal existence as Israelites. (See 
Literary Criticism, p. vi.) 
The method of form criticism as applied to the OT is not 
without crucial deficiencies. Because oral units were assumed to 
be short, the criterion of brevity was developed. This led to 
the assumption that the shortest accounts are necessarily the 
oldest and that they grew by later accretions. Archaeological 
discoveries effectively challenge this assumption. On account of 
the assumption of the growth from small to large complexes and 
narratives, it is believed that objective elements of history 
cannot be found in the OT. Finally, the assumption of form criti-
cism that a particular genre is firmly linked to a particular 
institution has led to gross misconceptions. A basic problem of 
form criticism is that it carries within itself tendencies of 
evolution such as from small to large and from primitive to 
advanced. 
Form Criticism of the New Testament  
Form criticism of the NT was developed primarily by K. L. 
Schmidt (1891-1956), Martin Dibelius (1883-1947), and Rudolf 
Bultmann (1884- 	 ), who built on the method of Gunkel in OT

--- Page 89 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 79 
studies. It is the form criticism of Bultmann that we shall 
notice here. His form criticism of the Gospels attempts to trace 
the oral preliterary stage of the Gospels. Its approach is based 
on several assumptions--the most fundamental being that the Gos-
pels are built basically on individual sayings and narratives. 
They were developed as oral folk literature composed of many small 
units circulating effortlessly as separate units for a period of 
time before they were brought together in the sources used in the 
formation of the gospel. Added to this basic presupposition is 
another--that the Sitz im Leben of the Gospels is the church and 
not the life of Jesus; that is to say, the picture of Jesus pre-
sented in the Gospels is largely the creation of the imaginative 
community of believers. The contents of the gospel then reflect 
more the developing life and needs of the Christian community 
than the life of Jesus. The concern of the early church, it was 
presupposed, was not literary or historical but evangelistic. 
This interest in preaching cultivated and formed the traditions 
regarding the life of Jesus. 
On the basis of these presuppositions it was only natural 
that Bultmann should feel that a genuine biography of Jesus was 
impossible. For him the community out of which the Gospels (the 
only primary source for the life of Jesus) arose was not concerned 
to transmit biographical information. It transmitted instead 
individual sayings and narratives that had been formulated for 
the community's own purposes. 
The presuppositions of NT form criticism led to the position 
that the Gospels result from an imaginative community, reflecting 
its own life-style and need. Not only does this method counter 
the evangelical concept of revelation-inspiration but it also 
fails to take adequate account of the presence of eyewitnesses in 
the early church. It is likewise not in harmony with more recent 
understandings of the development of folk literature which indicate 
that this type of literature cannot be accounted for on the basis 
of the creative imagination of a community. 
Tradition Criticism 
Another recent development in biblical studies is that of 
tradition criticism, which attempts to come to grips with the 
questions raised by source criticism and left unanswered by form 
criticism. Thus it is a new attempt to tell the whole story about 
the origin and development of the Bible. 
Source criticism dealt primarily with the supposed literary 
sources. Form criticism dealt with individual literary units and

--- Page 90 ---
80 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the setting of these units in the life of the people. Tradition 
criticism presupposes and leans heavily on both source and form 
criticism as it makes a new attempt to trace the development of 
the Bible from its conception through its oral and literary 
history to its final form. 
Tradition criticism is interested in the history that has 
been involved in the formation, modification, and/or synthesis of 
the original oral and written sources that eventually were brought 
together to form the Bible. And it is interested in knowing the 
unique motivation--whether theological, political, or social--for 
the various stages of this history. 
Old Testament Tradition Criticism  
For the OT, Ivan Engnell (1906-1964) and Martin Noth (1902-
1968) who amplified and popularized the views of Albrecht Alt 
(1883-1956) are examples of pioneers in tradition criticism. The 
work of Noth and Engnell illustrates some of the differences in 
emphasis within tradition criticism itself. 	 Engnell, working 
from the perspective of the Scandinavian "Uppsala School," 
rejected the Wellhausen idea of anonymous redactors, explaining 
the formation of biblical materials rather on the basis of circles 
and schools of tradition, working both from oral and written mate-
rials. Noth, on the other hand, placed more emphasis on the writ-
ten material. 
An illustration of Noth's method can be drawn from a single 
facet of his attempts to show how Israel's complex traditions were 
made to serve the unification of the twelve tribes. For him, the 
nation developed slowly by unifying unrelated small clans and 
tribes, brought about, in part, by the development of a common 
store of traditions. The story of Jacob, for example, is assumed 
to be derived from several strands of tradition representing ances-
tors of different North Palestinian groups of people. Assuming 
unification, from a common ancestry, to be a major goal, Noth sees 
it met by such a development of the tradition of the journey of 
Jacob as to unite the several strands in one account. But the 
ancestral heroes of the southern tribes were Abraham and Isaac. 
By the development of the tradition that Jacob was in the line of 
descent of Abraham and Isaac it was possible for unity to exist 
among the southern and northern tribes. 
Again of interest to us is the fact that the basic presuppo-
sition of tradition criticism is that the Bible must be treated 
on the same bases as any other literature, for the reason that its 
development is the same. As Rylaarsdam again has indicated, tra-

--- Page 91 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 81 
dition criticism is based on the recognition that the very exist-
ence of the community gives shape to the tradition and results in 
handing it on to one generation after another. 
New Testament Redaction Criticism 
The term "redaction criticism" is more generally used to 
describe the NT discipline because it concentrates on the final 
edition, the time span for the development of the tradition being 
much less in the NT than in the OT. NT redaction criticism has 
been interested in the author's theological motivation for the 
collection, arrangement, and modification of traditional material 
in its final form. This interest in theological motivation is 
not, however, an interest in the theology of a book or of the 
Bible. It is concerned more with the way in which the theological 
emphasis of one author differs from that of another. By a compari-
son of the similarities and the differences of the Gospels in their 
final form, in their use and omission of sources and in their com-
ments, it is felt that it is possible to identify the unique theo-
logical motives that compelled the author to bring the material 
together in a particular way. 
NT redaction criticism has built largely on the work of 
Bultmann in that he was more concerned for the motivational factors 
involved in the final form. NT redaction criticism developed under 
the work of Gather Bornkamm (1905- 	 ), Hans Conzelmann (1915- 
), and Willi Marxsen (1919- 	 ). The work of Conzelmann on 
the Gospel of Luke will illustrate briefly the types of conclusions 
reached by redaction criticism. Conzelmann completely broke with 
the view that Luke was the first church historian. By his analysis 
of the Gospel of Luke, noting the sources in the Gospel, Conzelmann 
came to the conclusion that Luke was a self-conscious theologian 
rather than a church historian because the details of his compo-
sition could be shown to have been theologically motivated. 
Recent Developments in Biblical Studies  
As a result of recent archaeological discoveries and other 
correctives to the Wellhausen theory, OT scholarship has moved 
away from the most extreme liberal views of the 19th century. The 
trustworthiness of the biblical materials and the early date for 
the many traditions recorded in that material are now more gener-
ally recognized. The uniqueness and grandeur of Yahwism is gener-
ally respected, and it is recognized that this religion did not 
develop along the lines of a neat evolutionary scheme. The 8th 
century prophets are no longer considered the originators but

--- Page 92 ---
82 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
rather the heirs of a monotheism that in some forms could have 
reached back to the times of the patriarchs. The discovery of 
the Dead Sea scrolls has brought about more respect for the previ-
ously available OT texts. It also helped to illuminate the history 
of the intertestamental period and provide background material 
out of which the NT could be more fully understood. 
NT studies have often tended to move away from extreme 
approaches. The Gospel of John, for example, is more frequently 
placed in the first century A.D. and by some is considered to be 
reasonably trustworthy historically, as also the book of Acts. 
The letters traditionally attributed to Paul (with three or four 
exceptions) are becoming more widely accepted as Pauline. Great 
strides have also been made in textual critical and linguistic 
studies. 
Biblical studies, and NT studies in particular, are still 
wrestling with the questions raised by the hermeneutical approach 
of Bultmann. This approach is an apologetical approach that 
attempts to demythologize the Bible in order to make its message 
acceptable to modern man. To demythologize means to reinterpret 
mythological terms as those that are existentially (using particu-
larly the categories of the German existential philosopher Martin 
Heidegger) relevant to man's understanding of his own existence. 
In turn, for Bultmann mythology is anything not acceptable to the 
modern scientific world view. Anything bordering on the super-
natural (such as miracles, divine intervention in human history, 
angels, Satan, or heaven) is considered mythology. While strip-
ping off the mythology Bultmann desires to maintain the kerygma--
the essential message--that which is existentially relevant to 
man's understanding of his existence. 
Bultmann believes that it is possible and proper to demytholo-
gize the Bible because he sees the Bible writers as portraying 
their understanding of their own existence rather than recording 
an objective reality. (For a discussion of the propositional and 
objective aspects of Scripture, over against concepts that consider 
it to be purely subjective, see chapter 1.) Bultmann thus thought 
that it is possible to relate the functional aspects the myth had 
for the author to contemporary man's understanding of his existence. 
Bultmann approaches biblical eschatology and Creation, for 
example, as myths. He sees the concept of the end of the age 
through supernatural intervention (accompanied by a final judg-
ment that assigns destinies) as an absurd superstition to contem-
porary man. History, contends Bultmann, will not come to an end 
through some supernatural means. If an end should come, it will 
be by such a natural means as war or a change in the sun's

--- Page 93 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 83 
radiation patterns. Yet the essential message of the eschatologi-
cal "myths" is not unrelated to contemporary man's existence, for 
every man is destined to die. There is urgency, then, in making 
decisions about one's own personal existence in that every moment 
contains the possibility of being the eschatological moment. 
Bultmann considers the "myth" of Creation not as a fanciful 
account of the world's origin but as a description of the crea-
turely dependent state of man. 
Bultmann, in his approach to the Bible, has brought together 
systematically and apologetically many of the more important recent 
trends in theological and philosophical thought. Not only does 
Bultmann have roots in 19th century liberalism but also in dialec-
tical theology. He has capitalized on the form critical method 
and 20th century existentialist thought, while remaining aware of 
contemporary philosophies of history. Not only did he combine 
these theological interests but also he had the modern communica-
tive interest of attempting to speak to contemporary secularized 
man, whose living and thinking has been conditioned by modern 
science. 
The hermeneutical approach of Bultmann recognizes one aspect 
of the biblical picture, and that is man in his relation with God; 
however, it denies God's transcendence as well as His ability to 
act in the events of history. Similarly, the biblical message, it 
should be noted, not only speaks about man in his relation to God 
but also about God apart from man, and about God's divine acts in 
history. (The concept that the biblical record of God's activities 
in history--as for example in the Resurrection of Christ--must be 
taken seriously has recently been championed by W. Pannenberg.) 
Many scholars of the Bultmann school, as well as others, have 
stressed that Bultmann's approach leads to a serious reduction of 
the Christian message to a subjectively controlled bare minimum. 
In recent years there has been reemphasis in both OT and NT 
studies on biblical theology. Critical methods have a tendency 
to deal only with parts of Scripture or even with certain phases 
of a specific Scripture, such as the linguistic phase or the his-
torical phase. Thus critical methodologies themselves do not 
deal with what might be considered the essence of the biblical 
material. Biblical theology, on the other hand, is an attempt to 
understand the biblical message as a whole. It has the potential 
of studying the biblical message from the standpoint of the Bible 
itself rather than from that of some external philosophical model. 
Thus it can move in the direction of a more constructive and use-
ful approach to the understanding of the message of the Bible. The 
usefulness of this approach in the future, however, will depend on 
the willingness to lay aside those presuppositions that make the

--- Page 94 ---
84 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Bible only a human book and to accept the Bible's self-understanding, 
namely, that it is also the Word of God. 
Implications of Biblical Criticism 
for Adventist Biblical Studies  
The more careful approach to the study of the Bible in this 
century should not be taken as an uncritical return to Protestant 
orthodoxy or to concepts of revelation held by the Reformers. 
Although liberal critical studies have reexamined many former posi-
tions due to the availability of new information and the applica-
tion of new methodologies, they have not abandoned the original 
presuppositions of liberalism. Critical biblical studies are not 
in general moving in the direction of recognizing the Bible as the 
Word of God to mankind and thus they do not give the impression of 
moving in the direction of attempting to bring about a fuller 
understanding and acquaintance with the God of the universe. 
Modern critical studies explain the content and form of 
biblical material on the basis of the natural outworking of the 
forces of history, sociology, anthropology, psychology, politics, 
and the laws of literature as seen through the eyes of naturalistic 
and evolutionistic philosophies rather than as the outworking of 
God's efforts to speak objectively to mankind. The Bible is 
seen as a resultant of these forces among and within nations and 
societies rather than as the record of the activity of God in his-
tory and the giving of an inspired message. It is an individual 
or a community speaking to itself rather than God speaking to that 
individual or community. It is dominated by a study of the reli-
gion, culture, and history of a people rather than a study of God's 
plan in history to reconcile mankind to Himself. It is the study 
of pieces of Hebrew and early Christian literature rather than a 
unified body of revelation. 
Rylaarsdam, writing within the general framework of biblical 
criticism, affirms that the basic presupposition of modern criti-
cism is that the Bible has developed historically according to the 
same laws of history that have governed the development of other 
ancient national traditions. 
This, he insists, is what makes the criticism "modern." It 
had to make its way cautiously against the long-standing "tradi-
tions of dogma and confessional authority" that saw the language 
of Scripture as the vehicle of the divine absolute. This modern 
criticism, by contrast, saw the contents of the Bible as condi-
tioned by the same human limitations and situation as modified

--- Page 95 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 85 
any other kinds of historical tradition. (See Literary Criticism, 
pp. viii and ix.)*  
The presuppositions of modern biblical studies, then, are 
radically different from those outlined in the first chapter of 
this symposium. The Bible, having been reduced to the level of 
a mere human book, is no longer the normative, authoritative Word 
of God recording His will and purpose for mankind. God's transcen-
dence and His acts in history are denied or radically transformed 
on the assumption that these concepts conflict with the mood of 
modern man and his evolutionistic scientific outlook. The Bible 
thus contains man's reflections about God rather than God's 
message to man. 
Due to space limitations it has not been the intention of 
this chapter to deal with every major trend or development in the 
history of critical biblical studies. It has been our purpose 
primarily to trace some of these developments in order to show 
the basis on which these critical studies are founded in order, 
again, that their value in conservative biblical studies might be 
seen. 
Although declaring so plainly that the underlying presupposi-
tions of biblical criticism are contrary to those on which the 
message of the Seventh-day Adventist Church is founded, this writer 
recognizes that certain aspects of modern biblical studies have 
done much to establish an accurate text of the Bible and to sharpen 
our understanding of the language of the Bible. They have greatly 
illuminated the background and climate in which God revealed Him-
self to His people. They have also at times provided new dimen-
sions for interpreting the biblical message. Although liberal 
criticism has contributed in its own way to an understanding of 
the Bible, the question must be raised as to whether the presuppo-
sitions can be separated from the method without destroying the 
latter. This issue must likewise be considered whether one is 
formulating or applying a valid methodology in the study of Scrip-
ture. It is undeniable that the developments outlined above depre-
ciated the authority and function of the Bible in Christianity. 
Over against these effects, the binding function and authoritative 
nature of the Bible must be reasserted, for the Bible is, after 
all, the Word of God, the norm by which is revealed to man God's 
character and will and His plan for reconciling man to Himself. 
*Grateful acknowledgment is made to Fortress Press for permis-
sion to quote from Literary Criticism of the Old Testament by Nor-
man Habel, edited by J. Coert Rylaarsdam, 1971.

--- Page 96 ---
86 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
READING LIST  
Buttrick, George Arthur, ed. The Interpreter's Dictionary of the 
Bible. 4 vols. New York: Abingdon Press, 1962. 
Contains helpful articles surveying the thinking of 
those involved in critical studies in many topic areas. 
Guthrie, D. and Motyer, J. A., eds. The New Bible Commentary: 
Revised. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 
1970. 
This one-volume commentary contains introductory mate-
rials that give a survey and conservative critique of recent 
studies. 
	 . New Testament Introduction. 3 vols. Chicago: Inter- 
Varsity Press, 1966. 
These volumes, The Gospel and Acts, Hebrews to Revela-
tion, and The Pauline Epistles deal with the questions of 
introduction and methodology for the NT from a conservative 
viewpoint. 
Hahn, Herbert F. The Old Testament in Modern Research. Phila-
delphia: Fortress Press, 1966. 
A survey is given of the development of critical and 
other approaches to the study of the OT. 
Hasel, Gerhard F. Old Testament Theology: Basic Issues in the 
Current Debate. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. 
Co., 1972. 
Presents a discussion of methodology in OT theology 
with proposals for a conservative approach. 
Harrison, Roland Kenneth. Introduction to the Old Testament. 
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1971. 
The introduction and method of study of the OT is 
considered in detail by a conservative scholar. 
Hyatt, J. Philip, ed. The Bible in Modern Scholarship. Nash-
ville: Abingdon Press, 1965. 
Contains a symposium of papers on trends in biblical 
scholarship which were presented at the 100th meeting of the 
Society of Biblical Literature. 
Ladd, George Eldon. The New Testament and Criticism. Grand 
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1967. 
An attempt to restructure in terms of conservative 
presuppositions current methods in biblical study.

--- Page 97 ---
Postreformation Critical Biblical Studies 	 87 
Neill, Stephen. The Interpretation of the New Testament 1861-
1961. A Galaxy Book. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1966. 
A survey of methodologies employed for the study of the 
NT. 
Nichol, Francis D., ed., The Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commen- 
tary. 7 vols. Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald Pub. 
Assoc., 1953-1957. 
This commentary contains helpful surveys and critiques 
of critical biblical studies. 
Richardson, Alan, ed. A Dictionary of Christian Theology. Phila-
delphia: Westminster Press, 1969. 
This volume is useful as a survey tool for biblical 
studies in areas where theology has implications for bibli-
cal hermeneutics. 
Rylaarsdam, J. Coert or Via, Dan 0., Jr., eds. Guides to Biblical 
Scholarship. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1969-1972. 
This series, including Literary Criticism of the Old 
Testament, Form Criticism of the Old Testament, Tradition 
History of the Old Testament, Literary Criticism of the New 
Testament, What Is Form Criticism? and What Is Redaction 
Criticism? surveys the disciplines of biblical criticism 
from within the disciplines themselves. 
Young, Edward J. An Introduction to the Old Testament. Grand 
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1970. 
A conservative discussion of introduction to and methods 
in the study of the OT.

--- Page 98 ---
Receiving his early education in his 
home State of Washington, and with a 
number of years of ministerial service 
in the Michigan Conference of Seventh-
day Adventists, Dr. Kenneth A. Strand 
is professor of church history at the 
Seventh-day Adventist Theological Semi-
nary and has taught there since 1959. 
His doctorate in church history was 
awarded by the University of Michigan. 
His dissertation was entitled: "A Low-
German Edition of the Gospels and Book 
of Acts Based on Hieronymus Eraser's 
Version and Published by the Brethren 
of the Common Life at Rostock About 
1530."

--- Page 99 ---
6. Modern Protestant Conservative 
Biblical Studies in America  
KENNETH A. STRAND 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
At the beginning of the twentieth century Protestant conserva-
tive Bible scholarship in America was generally held in high esteem, 
but between the two world wars it neglected to keep pace with lib-
eral scholarship in producing carefully researched publications; 
consequently it experienced serious loss in influence and promi-
nence. However, recent years have witnessed a change of emphasis 
whereby conservatives are again beginning to regain distinction 
by their serious efforts in biblical and theological research, 
and a brief description of certain recent trends among them will 
be worthwhile here. 
In treating the specific question of the hermeneutical con-
cerns of modern Protestant conservative Bible scholarship in Amer-
ica it will be necessary first to define what is meant by the term 
conservative. This designation, like the term liberal, covers a 
great variety of attitudes and approaches. In conjunction with 
the need for definition, a brief historical survey will be neces-
sary. After treating these preliminary matters, we will proceed 
to a discussion of hermeneutical questions as they relate to four 
main areas of concern among conservatives: (1) The matter of in-
spiration of Scripture, (2) the question of utilizing modern 
scholarly tools and techniques in Bible research, (3) the ques-
tion of the Bible in relationship to modern scientific discovery, 
and (4) trends in the field of biblical eschatology. Although 
other topics could well claim our attention, space necessitates 
limiting the discussion; and these four areas will serve to focus 
on the major issues germane to the subject. 
The "Conservatives": 
Definition and Brief Historical Survey  
Conservative Christianity as we know it today is a variegated 
phenomenon. Not only does it represent a variety of views among

--- Page 100 ---
90 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
its adherents but also it often crosses denominational lines, to 
include various groups of Baptists, Lutherans, Methodists, Pres-
byterians, and others. In some cases the conservative wing of a 
particular denomination or confession represents a small minority 
of the adherents of the affiliation or confession; but in other 
cases, entire denominations may lie within the framework of con-
servatism--as is the case, for example, with Seventh-day Advent-
ists. Conservatives of today vary greatly with respect to such 
matters as social concern, some taking a real and active interest 
along these lines and others virtually neglecting this area of 
service. There are also degrees of openness to scientific dis-
covery and to using methodologies in vogue in biblical and theo-
logical studies. 
Just who, then, are the conservatives? What characteristics 
bind them together? 
In a general way it may be said that conservatives, in con-
trast to liberals, (1) emphasize the Bible as directly the reve-
lation of God, inspired by Him, and put more emphasis on propo-
sitional truth than liberals do; (2) place revelation as a source 
of knowledge of God above such things as reason or intuition; 
(3) proclaim the deity of Christ as traditionally held and stress 
Jesus' virgin birth and the miracles He performed during His min-
istry; (4) emphasize the reality of Christ's resurrection from 
the dead; (5) look forward to His second advent; (6) stress the 
redemptive nature of Christ's substitutionary death on the cross; 
(7) take both sin and salvation from sin by grace seriously, 
attaching great significance to the conversion experience of the 
individual; (8) believe in predictive prophecy; and (9) recog-
nize God's supernatural activity in Creation and at various times 
in history as recorded in Scripture. In addition, conservatives 
of our time characteristically have held a more negative and pes-
simistic view of modern culture than have the liberals. (It 
should be noted that the term conservative as used herein is a 
broad designation that includes fundamentalists, new evangelicals 
[or new conservatives], and other groups, as will become more 
clear as we proceed.) 
Throughout the Christian era there have been numerous con-
servative Christians. The major Protestant Reformers of the six-
teenth century should be classified as such, of course. More 
recent roots from which modern American Protestant conservatism 
has stemmed may be found in Pietism, in English Puritanism, in the 
Wesleyan revival, and in other similar movements that in due 
course crossed the Atlantic. The Great Awakenings on the North 
American continent itself provide still further backgrounds. How-
ever, an especially critical development that has been basic to

--- Page 101 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 91 
the formation of major trends in present-day American conservative 
Protestantism is the liberal-fundamentalist controversy and its 
aftermath. In order to defend traditional Christian views on such 
matters as the inspiration of Scripture, the deity of Christ, and 
the supernatural activity of God in Creation and redemption, some 
twelve volumes entitled The Fundamentals were published from 1910 
to 1914. About three million copies of these volumes were distri-
buted throughout the English-speaking world; and a number of other 
works repudiating liberalism, higher criticism, and modernism 
appeared. There were attacks on science and on the scientific 
method, especially because of uniformitarian and organic-evolution 
theories propounded by scientists and accepted by the modernist 
Christian theologians. 
Because of the significance of the set of volumes entitled 
The Fundamentals, the name fundamentalist became attached to the 
defenders of the faith whose views were represented in these vol-
umes. From that day to this the so-called fundamentalists have 
tended to be rigid in their doctrine of scriptural inspiration, 
and often place great emphasis on adherence to certain traditional 
or orthodox doctrinal positions. On the other hand, they fre-
quently have been accused of failing to make the Bible message 
relevant to modern man and of failing also to become involved in 
the area of social concern. Doubtless fearful of the connotations 
of the social-gospel movement, they have shrunk from meeting the 
needs of society, and in this respect have revealed a strange 
departure from the truly strong social concern of many of their 
forerunners in the nineteenth and earlier centuries. 
During the 1920's and 1930's various literary battles and 
oral confrontations took place between outstanding liberal and 
fundamentalist representatives. It seemed for the most part that 
liberal scholarship repeatedly gained ground and that the overrigid 
stance of the fundamentalists was seen as untenable. Whereas dur-
ing those decades the liberals had many qualified scholars, funda-
mentalists could boast but few. In fact, fundamentalists often 
took a rather defensive position against advanced education. 
In large part, the fundamentalist regression came about 
through loss of seminaries for training the ministry, failure to 
reach the general public, and a tendency to become so exclusive 
as to bring about not only isolation from liberals but also divi-
sion within fundamentalism. It is pertinent to say that in addi-
tion to the fundamentalist movement as such there is a fundamen-
talist mentality, and that the latter bears within it the seeds 
of divisiveness. As Edward J. Carnell points out, the mentality 
of fundamentalism is characterized by such things as ideological 
thinking (which is "rigid, intolerant, and doctrinaire"), intel-

--- Page 102 ---
92 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
lectual stagnation, and negative ethic (see The Case for Orthodox 
Theology [1959], pp. 113-125). 
By the 1940's and 1950's a concerned group of conservative 
Christian scholars within the fundamentalist movement endeavored 
to infuse new life into it. Adhering to the traditional fundamen-
tals of the Christian faith--including belief in the Bible as the 
inspired Word of God, acceptance of the deity of Christ in its 
historically accepted sense, and other basic tenets of the funda-
mentalist position--they were more flexible than some of their 
colleagues with regard to such matters as the findings of science 
and the use of newly developed tools and methods for Bible study. 
Frequently they manifested real concern for society and its needs--
without, of course, denying the necessity of the individual con-
version experience. 
An early harbinger of this new attitude may be found in dis-
cussions that created the National Association of Evangelicals 
for United Action in 1943, a group referred to as new evangelicals 
(to distinguish these particular conservatives from the fundamen-
talists, from the evangelicals of earlier times, and from evangel-
icals in other parts of the world). The National Association 
itself was to be interdenominational, and it had a test of fellow-
ship covering only doctrines held to be most essential (a list of 
seven basic teachings is conveniently quoted by Bruce Shelley in 
his Evangelicalism in America, pp. 71, 72). A softening attitude 
toward society and its needs was seen in the work of affiliated 
organizations such as The World Relief Commission and The Commis-
sion on Social Action. Although the relief and welfare work of 
these new evangelicals may be comparatively modest, it reveals a 
significant break from the attitude of older fundamentalism. 
Perhaps one of the most striking steps in the division be-
tween fundamentalism and the new evangelicalism came in 1947, when 
one of the prominent leaders of the new movement, Carl F. H. Henry, 
published his book The Uneasy Conscience of Modern Fundamentalism. 
According to his preface Henry did not intend to deny any of the 
fundamentals of doctrine; but he was quite critical of the posi-
tion fundamentalism had taken with regard to meeting the needs of 
society. The following year Edward J. Carnell published his 
Introduction to Christian Apologetics, which is sometimes con-
sidered a major turning point in conservative endeavor to dialogue 
with modern philosophers and with theologians of nonconservative 
stance. 
A further significant step in the history of the new evangeli-
cals was the establishment of the Evangelical Theological Society 
for mutual association and discussion among biblical scholars and

--- Page 103 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 93 
theologians of conservative viewpoint. Further treatment of the 
position of this society with respect to the question of inspira-
tion of Scripture will be given in our next section, where we will 
discuss the society's doctrinal basis which was adopted as part 
of its constitution in 1951. 
So the older fundamentalism has now been divided by the emer-
gence of the new evangelicalism, but it is not always simple to 
differentiate between the two groups because of the variety of 
belief within each. Indeed, positions held by the more liberal 
fundamentalists may well tend to merge with those held by the more 
conservative new evangelicals. However, a distinction usually can 
be made between the two groups on the basis that the new evangeli-
cals show a greater openness toward dialogue with the modern world, 
including an attempt to make the gospel message more relevant to 
modern man in both theological presentation and social action. 
Not all present-day conservative Protestant Christians are 
to be classified as either fundamentalists or new evangelicals, 
as has been indicated earlier. This terminology, in the first 
place, is most appropriate to the North American scene. Present-
day conservatism in England and on the continent of Europe, for 
example, has for the most part a somewhat different line of develop-
ment. But even in America there are conservative groups, such as 
the Seventh-day Adventists, that cannot easily be classified as 
either fundamentalists or new evangelicals. 
Inspiration of Scripture  
One of the most basic concerns of conservative theologians 
relates to the question of the inspiration of Scripture. The old 
fundamentalists took a rigid position that the Bible was verbally 
inspired. Not all fundamentalists would see eye to eye on this 
matter, but for some the total effect of their position has been 
to suggest that Scripture was given virtually by a dictation method. 
Even though the term dictation is often repudiated by them, some 
seem to say that God inspired not only the men but also the very 
words in which the divine messages were transcribed by prophets 
and apostles. A few fundamentalists would carry the point as far 
as to claim that the English King James Version was uniquely 
authoritative or inspired. There has also been some skepticism 
toward any type of study relating to the text and the history of 
Bible books or of Bible passages. The difficulty in establishing 
the exact views of inspiration held by the new evangelicals may 
be somewhat represented by Wick Broomall's book entitled Biblical 
Criticism, produced in 1957. In it he points out (pp. 23, 24) that 
many liberal scholars equate "verbal inspiration with dictation"

--- Page 104 ---
94 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
and thereby endeavor to make the conservative position look ludi-
crous. But he goes on to say that "whatever may be the unjust 
caricature of the conservative view, the Bible most deliberately 
teaches the verbal inspiration of its documents." He even goes 
so far as to say that "the modern idea that only the thought (but 
not the words) was inspired is utterly foreign to the Scriptures 
and absolutely obnoxious to any true view of inspiration." Broo-
mall, on the other hand, recognizes the value of using certain 
tools for better understanding of the text, and he emphasizes the 
need to be well versed in biblical languages. 
There is growing evidence that the new evangelicals have 
broadened the concept of inspiration held by the fundamentalists. 
An indication of this tendency is seen in the newer attitudes 
toward the use of tools by which to gain a better understanding 
of Scripture. Edward Carnell, for example, in his Introduction 
to Christian Apologetics (pp. 192-194) in 1948 made a distinction 
between the acceptability of lower criticism, which deals with the 
state of the biblical text, and higher criticism, which deals with 
the application of secular scientific historical methodology to 
the study of the biblical text. He believed that the former was 
legitimate but the latter was not. By 1959, however, he was will-
ing in his The Case for Orthodox Theology (p. 97) to go as far as 
to declare that "any investigation that throws light on the lit-
erary and historical background of the Bible" would be welcomed 
by orthodoxy. Bernard Ramm had earlier expressed a similarly 
favorable view toward the use of both lower and some aspects of 
higher criticism in his Protestant Christian Evidences of 1953 
(see pp. 19-21). Indeed, Ramm notes that the "factuality of the 
Bible as a document" would be vindicated by proper use of such 
methods. 
We more specifically now come to the question of what inspira-
tion of Scripture signifies to the new evangelicals. Again, it 
is difficult to generalize their mainstream position, but their 
basic understanding of inspiration at an early stage of develop-
ment was perhaps characterized by the constitution of the Evan-
gelical Theological Society, adopted January 1, 1951. In Article 
III, entitled "Doctrinal Basis," we find the following statement: 
"The Bible alone and the Bible in its entirety, is the Word of God 
written, and therefore inerrant in the autographs." All members 
of the society were required to subscribe to this doctrinal basis 
yearly. It seems evident that this particular statement, although 
it broadens somewhat the position of the earlier fundamentalists, 
adheres basically to a verbal-inspiration theory, sometimes re-
ferred to as plenary inspiration. The matter of verbal inerrancy 
is safeguarded in the phrase "inerrant in the autographs."

--- Page 105 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 95 
Apparently the new evangelicals were quite ready to recognize 
the obvious fact that different extant Bible manuscripts vary 
somewhat, but in 1951 they may have wished to maintain the idea of 
an original God-given wording. Be that as it may, the decade of 
the 1960's brought about a breach within the society itself and 
among evangelicals in general over this matter. Especially im-
portant was Dewey M. Beegle's publication The Inspiration of 
Scripture, which appeared in 1963. In Beegle's opinion conserva-
tives have erred in using a deductive approach to the question of 
inspiration, based on the postulate of God's sovereignty. They 
have deduced that a sovereign God must needs have revealed Him-
self inerrantly. However, the very fact that extant manuscripts 
often differ has shown that not all of them can be error free, 
and thus there has had to be a further deduction that the autographs 
must have been error free. 
Beegle himself would break with this sort of reasoning and 
use an inductive approach to the question of inspiration. Instead 
of beginning with generalities from which a series of deductions 
are drawn he thought it better to go to the Scriptures themselves 
to see what they say about the manner in which they are inspired. 
According to Beegle, the Bible does proclaim for itself inspiration 
and authoritativeness, but it does not proclaim a doctrine of 
inerrancy. In fact, one should remember that when Jesus and the 
apostles appealed to Scripture they utilized the manuscripts of 
their time, not the supposedly inerrant autographs. Beegle also 
points out the problem of whether human language is really capable 
of giving inerrant communication from God. 
Beegle is not the only scholar among the new evangelicals who 
seems to have broken with the view given in the 1951 "Doctrinal 
Basis" of the Evangelical Theological Society, but he perhaps rep-
resents as radical a departure from that position as any first-
rate new evangelical scholar (obviously not all aspects of his 
position have been treated here). Moreover, although some of the 
original excitement within evangelical circles on the question of 
inspiration has subsided, probably the debate is not yet over. 
Nevertheless, in spite of mutual disagreements on the matter, 
evangelicals of rather differing views can--and still do--live 
within what is to them a generally acceptable conservative 
confraternity. 
Although on the North American scene a great deal of promi-
nence has been attached either to the fundamentalist viewpoint or 
to the somewhat similar evangelical attitude toward the question 
of the inspiration of Scripture, it should be noted that not all 
conservatives have accepted either a strict or a modified verbal-
inspiration theory. In fact, the more recent indications are that

--- Page 106 ---
96 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
some evangelical positions--although retaining the expressions 
verbal or plenary inspiration--may be close to that held by the 
Seventh-day Adventists, among others, as stated in the introduc-
tion to the book The Great Controversy, by Ellen G. White (pp. 
vii-ix): 
The Bible points to God as its author; yet it was 
written by human hands; and in the varied style of its 
different books it presents the characteristics of the 
several writers. The truths revealed are all "given by 
inspiration of God" (2 Timothy 3:16); yet they are ex-
pressed in the words of men. The Infinite One by His 
Holy Spirit has shed light into the minds and hearts of 
His servants. He has given dreams and visions, symbols 
and figures; and those to whom the truth was thus re-
vealed, have themselves embodied the thought in human 
language. . . . 
The Bible, with its God-given truths expressed in 
the language of men, presents a union of the divine with 
the human. Such a union existed in the nature of Christ, 
who was the Son of God and the Son of man. Thus it is 
true of the Bible, as it was of Christ, that "the Word 
was made flesh, and dwelt among us." John 1:14. . . . 
The testimony is conveyed through the imperfect 
expression of human language, yet it is the testimony of 
God; and the obedient, believing child of God beholds in 
it the glory of a divine power, full of grace and truth. 
Reasons for the unacceptability of the inspiration theory 
implied in the "Doctrinal Basis" of the Evangelical Theological 
Society have been aptly discussed by a Seventh-day Adventist 
scholar, Dr. Raymond F. Cottrell, in a series of editorials in 
the Review and Herald during 1966. On the one hand Cottrell points 
out that the wording "the Bible alone" imposes a limitation on 
God's ability to reveal Himself--a limitation that Seventh-day 
Adventists cannot accept. Cottrell calls attention to the fact 
that Scripture itself mentions other inspired writings that have 
not been included in the canon, and he warns against the danger 
of closing the door to the possibility of God's revealing Himself 
any further after the last material in the canon was produced. 
Such a limitation obviously would preclude God's choosing to re-
veal Himself in any special way today. (See Review and Herald, 
February 17, 1966, p. 13.) 
Cottrell has also challenged the usefulness and meaningfulness 
of the statement "inerrant in the autographs" because of its by-

--- Page 107 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 97 
passing "the real question--can we have confidence in the Bible as 
it exists today?" As Cottrell clearly points out, "The state of 
the original text is irrelevant to faith today, but it does make 
all the difference in the world whether we can have confidence in 
the adequacy of the text of Scripture that has come down to us, 
as a means to salvation." Such adequacy of the present text 
Cottrell, of course, fully accepts. (See Review and Herald, 
February 24, 1966, p. 13.) 
The position enunciated above regarding the divine-and-human 
nature of God's Word, together with the conviction that God has 
indeed preserved in the transmission of His Word all that is 
essential to salvation, provides a truly sound basis for a genuine 
conservative approach to the question of inspiration--one that 
harmonizes with the Scripture's own testimony regarding inspira-
tion and revelational method. 
Utilization of New Tools and  
Techniques in Biblical Studies  
We have already briefly mentioned that as twentieth-century 
conservative Christianity moved generally in a direction away from 
strict fundamentalism to new evangelicalism, there was also greater 
acceptance of scholarly techniques and of tools for use in bibli-
cal and theological studies. Indeed, from a very early time, 
archaeology was recognized by conservatives as a useful aid in the 
study of the Bible. Although fundamentalists tended to use archae-
ology to "prove" the Bible, most conservatives today would rather 
call attention to the remarkable confirmation that archaeological 
discovery has made at many points with regard to historical data 
recorded in Scripture. Conservatives have been among the foremost, 
for example, to hail the value of such discoveries as the Nuzu 
Tablets for the light they shed on patriarchal times and for numer-
ous other findings that illuminate the backgrounds of the OT and 
the NT. 
As briefly noted above, conservatives have also become in-
creasingly willing to enter into dialogue with nonconservatives 
(although the nonconservative response has not always been enthu-
siastic), and they have shown themselves to be generally adept in 
biblical languages and in knowledge of the history and transmis-
sion of the biblical text. They have come to the place where they 
are often quite ready to look seriously at the methodologies of 
literary criticism, form criticism, and other approaches used by 
modern liberal scholars in treating the Bible text. We may note 
that a number of fairly solid studies by conservatives have been 
forthcoming to deal with critical questions pertaining to the OT

--- Page 108 ---
98 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
and NT books. Various conservative publications such as Edward 
Young's Introduction to the Old Testament and Donald Guthrie's 
New Testament Introduction carefully weigh the strengths and weak-
nesses of the various modern methodologies in common use, and they 
are also fairly substantial works in their own right. Men such as 
Young and Guthrie, in their critiques of biblical criticism, give 
occasion for the question to be raised as to whether a student of 
the Bible can adopt the methodologies of critical biblical schol-
arship without embracing consciously or otherwise the presupposi-
tions on which those methodologies are built. (See chap. 5.) 
The historical introductions, grammars, and linguistic-
lexigraphical tools of high quality that have been produced in 
recent years by conservative scholars are too numerous to mention 
here. But it may be noted that conservative scholarship has taken 
on an air of less bitterness toward the position of the liberals; 
furthermore, that where conservatives have adopted some of the 
newer methodologies their use of them is frequently more balanced 
than has been the case with liberals. The latter altogether too 
often have tended to carry one methodology or another to extremes. 
Indeed, it is important to observe that the incisive critiques 
often given by conservatives of the methodologies used by liberals 
are well worth pondering by liberals and conservatives alike. 
Whether the liberal scholar recognizes it--and it appears that some 
such scholars are beginning to do so--conservatives have often 
brought a wholesome corrective into the field of present-day bibli-
cal and theological study. Wherein the conservative thus far gen-
erally has failed is in not having sufficient creativeness to 
develop new methodologies and approaches that would enhance our 
understanding of the biblical text and its message. 
With regard to hermeneutic itself, conservative scholars have 
been giving increasing attention to the need for work here too. 
Moreover, representative publications by evangelical scholars in 
this area have not neglected historical antecedents nor been una-
ware of contemporary trends. One may note, for instance, A. 
Berkeley Mickelsen's Interpreting the Bible (1963) as well as 
the symposia edited by John F. Walvoord, Inspiration and Interpre-
tation (1957), and by Carl F. Henry, Revelation and the Bible 
(1958). Also worthy of mention are Clark H. Pinnock, Biblical 
Revelation (1971); the paperback reprint of Section 3 of Baker's 
Dictionary of Practical Theology (1967) under the title Hermeneu-
tics; and the series of essays in Merrill C. Tenney, ed., The Bible: 
The Living Word of Revelation (1968). 
In closing this section it may be useful to notice one strik-
ing example of the kind of recognition that conservative scholars 
have begun to gain. The lengths of reign and synchronisms of the

--- Page 109 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 99 
kings of Israel and Judah as recorded in the OT have long baf-
fled scholars because of apparent inconsistencies and contradic-
tions, but a Seventh-day Adventist scholar, Edwin R. Thiele, 
unraveled the mystery in his book The Mysterious Numbers of the 
Hebrew Kings. In this book, first published in 1951 by the Uni-
versity of Chicago and Cambridge University presses and again in 
a revised edition in 1965 by the Eerdmans Publishing Company, 
Thiele shows the reliability of the biblical text. A liberal 
scholar, William A. Irwin, states in an introduction to Thiele's 
volume that the "unique feature of Professor Thiele's work is 
that he has attained his results by the most rigid application of 
scholarly facts and methods." Indeed, Irwin goes so far as to 
declare that "it is a matter of first-rate importance to learn now 
that the Books of Kings are reliable in precisely that feature 
which formerly excited only derision" (rev. ed., pp. xxi, xxiii). 
Religion and Science 
As noted earlier, one of the basic characteristics of early 
fundamentalism was inherent antagonism toward the sciences--
antagonism largely connected with the fact that theories of uni-
formitarianism and biological evolution not only were strongly 
promulgated by scientists but also were adopted by liberal theo-
logians into their "modernist" theology. The new evangelicals 
have endeavored to be true to the orthodox position, but they also 
have taken a more open attitude toward scientific discovery. Fre-
quently, new evangelicals have produced defenses of fiat Creation, 
the biblical account of the Flood, and similar matters. 	 There is 
even an effort by many conservatives to become adept in various of 
the sciences by advanced study in these disciplines. 
An interesting new development among certain prominent indi-
viduals of evangelical persuasion is a posture toward scientific 
theories that would, in the opinion of many of their brethren, 
lead away from a genuine Bible position. Many evangelicals still 
hold a chronology of Creation based on the genealogies in Genesis 
as given in the Masoretic text. Others, while retaining a rela-
tively low chronology, either point out that genealogy should not 
be treated as chronology or utilize the somewhat longer LXX chro-
nology. Still others tend to dismiss chronological concerns when 
they deal with the early chapters of Genesis. It still would be 
incomprehensible, of course, that any of the new evangelicals 
would deny fiat Creation, but some have made unusual concessions 
to the theory of biological evolution. Bernard Ramm, for example, 
speaks favorably of theistic evolution, although he would rather 
classify himself as a progressive creationist, for his feeling is 
that "in progressive creationism there is the best accounting for

--- Page 110 ---
100 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
all the facts--biological, geological, and Biblical" (see his The 
Christian View of Science and Scripture [1954], pp. 292, 293). He 
claims that many evangelicals would place the origin of man about 
10,000 B.C., "whereas others are willing to admit that man is hun-
dreds of thousands of years old"--Ibid., p. 347. 
Parallel to his posture toward the origin of man, Ramm has 
also argued against an anthropologically universal Flood--a posi-
tion challenged in a 1961 publication by John C. Whitcomb, Jr., 
and Henry M. Morris, The Genesis Flood: The Biblical Record and 
Its Scientific Implications (see pp. 36ff.). Various articles in 
the Creation Research Society Quarterly foster the concept of a 
universal Flood, together with a low chronology of that Flood as 
well as of Creation. 
Many well-informed conservatives continue to hold a relatively 
low chronology for Creation and the Flood. They recognize that 
newer types of scientific time clocks are yielding resultsout of 
harmony with their own concept of biblical time, but they also tend 
to stress that tentativeness should be attached to the findings of 
such time clocks. What may appear to some researchers as scientific 
certainty may in reality be quite tentative, they would suggest; 
and as one interesting example, they can point to developments on 
the Isle of Surtsey, which island appeared and took shape in 1963-
1964 through volcanic action in the North Atlantic Ocean near Ice-
land. Although scientists have suggested that sandy beaches require 
millennia or even millions of years to develop, a sandy beach ap-
peared on Surtsey in a matter of a few weeks! (See Sigurdur 
Thorarinsson, Surtsey, tr. by S. Eysteinsson [1964], p. 39.) Al-
though this phenomenon cannot be considered quite parallel to the 
more sophisticated time clocks, it does indicate the appropriate-
ness of a critical attitude toward supposed scientific knowledge. 
Biblical Eschatology 
In the field of biblical eschatology, the Augustinian amil-
lennialism dominated the scene for centuries, even until after the 
Protestant Reformation. But early in the eighteenth century a 
view called postmillennialism was set forth by Whitby and Vitringa. 
It was soon espoused by such religious leaders as Jonathan Edwards, 
and it found wide circulation through such famed Bible commentators 
as Adam Clarke, Albert Barnes, Thomas Scott, Matthew Henry, and 
David Brown. Eventually, in the early nineteenth century there 
was a resurgence of premillennialism. This went hand in hand with 
the widespread proclamation of the soon-expected second advent of 
Christ and was similar to the premillennial views held among most 
of the early church fathers prior to Augustine.

--- Page 111 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 101 
Whereas the amillennialists looked upon the thousand years 
of Revelation 20 as a figurative or symbolic number that depicted 
the Christian dispensation of this earth's history, the postmil-
lennialists thought of the millennium in terms of a sort of uto-
pian thousand years (not always taken to be a literal figure) that 
was to come before Christ's second advent. The premillennialist 
view is that Christ's second coming will be prior to the thousand-
year period of Revelation 20. Premillennialists so generally be-
lieve in an earthly millennial reign of the Jews that Seventh-day 
Adventists, because of their differing view on the millennium, are 
sometimes thought to be amillennialists. However, Seventh-day 
Adventists do believe in a premillennial second advent of Christ 
and a real millennium, and hence are indeed premillennialists. 
They obviously do not hold the amillennialist position. 
The aforementioned varying views regarding the millennium 
relate specifically to interpretation of the 20th chapter of 
Revelation. As for interpretation of the whole book, there has 
been a tendency--especially from the time of the Protestant Re-
formers onward--to regard various of its prophecies as finding 
fulfillment in the course of this earth's history, especially dur-
ing the Christian era. 
From small beginnings of such historical-type interpretation, 
wherein isolated prophecies were treated as having historical ful-
fillment, there eventually arose full-fledged historicist, or con-
tinuous historical, expositions. Most frequently these looked upon 
the prophetic messages in the book of Revelation as signifying a 
sequence of historical events in a straight line down through the 
centuries, culminating in Christ's second advent and subsequent 
events. Among adherents of this straight-line historicist inter-
pretation were such outstanding expositors as Albert Barnes and 
E. B. Elliott. 
Some historicists, such as Uriah Smith, also viewed the book 
of Revelation as being for the most part fulfilled in historical 
events during the present age; but instead of seeing a straight 
line through the book, these expositors found evidence of repeated 
sequences throughout Christian history. In other words, the pro-
phetic messages of the churches, seals, trumpets, and so forth, 
gave recapitulation of history from the NT period to the grand 
eschatological climax. 
Among some premillennialists of the early nineteenth century 
a futuristic outlook emerged. It was similar to that of the 
Jesuit scholar Ribera, who fostered such a concept during the late 
sixteenth century. To futurists virtually the entire book of 
Revelation, except possibly the messages to the seven churches

--- Page 112 ---
102 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
and the material in the final few chapters, is thought of as refer-
ring specifically to a short period of time near the close of this 
earth's history. The message to the seven churches could be taken 
as relating either to the churches in John's own day or to the 
church down through the ages (or to both). Otherwise, history 
virtually was left out of the book except for a short period just 
before Christ's second coming. To this period almost the entire 
book up to 19:11 is supposed to address itself. 
A particular variety of futurism known as pretribulationism 
originated early in the nineteenth century through the work of 
John Nelson Darby and various of his colleagues in the Plymouth 
Brethren movement in the British Isles. This view is also premil-
lennialist, but inserts an additional secret second coming of 
Christ seven years prior to Christ's open and visible second advent. 
The term pretribulationism stems from the belief that at this se-
cret second coming, all true Christians are raptured and taken to 
heaven so as to escape the great tribulation that is to take place 
during the closing scenes of earth's history. The rapture aspect 
of the doctrine is popularly known as the secret rapture. 
Followers of the Darbyian pretribulationism are also often 
referred to as dispensationalists, because of their belief that 
earth's history may be divided up into a number of eras or dispen-
sations wherein God has used different means in dealing with His 
people and in testing them with respect to obedience. In the words 
of one of their spokesmen, William Trotter, in his Plain Papers on 
Prophetic and Other Subjects these so-called dispensations "have 
run, are running, and have yet to run their course, so widely dif-
ferent in their character, that what is simple obedience and for 
the glory of God in one dispensation, may be entirely foreign to 
the character of another."--p. 401. He states further "that what 
God sanctions under one dispensation, may be so diverse from the 
spirit and character of another, as to be the subject of rebuke 
to those who desire to imitate it."--p. 402. 
Pretribulationism originated in Britain, as we have noted, 
but then it spread to America, where by the last two decades of 
the nineteenth century it began to enjoy rather widespread popu-
larity. The Scofield Reference Bible, which was first published 
in 1909 and has sold widely, helped greatly to foster the spread 
of the movement, especially among laymen; and today in America 
this variety of conservative eschatology appears to be the most 
widespread of any conservative position on the subject. 
The question may well be asked, Why should this particular 
view take such firm hold in North America? Certainly the popu-
larity of the Scofield Reference Bible, just mentioned, accounts

--- Page 113 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 103 
to a considerable degree for this. But there may also be another 
important factor, especially as far as the early years are con-
cerned; namely, that conservative Christians tended to see this 
premillennial position as more biblical than postmillennialism, 
and accepted it in reaction against the latter. This possibility 
has been suggested by George Eldon Ladd in his book The Blessed 
Hope. 
Pretribulationists, of course, cannot provide any strong 
biblical evidence for their secret-rapture idea. Rather, this 
idea comes by inference from texts relating to deliverance from 
tribulation, as well as from a peculiar interpretation of such 
Bible passages as "one shall be taken, and the other left" (Mt 24: 
40, 41). Also, a frequent practice of adherents of this particu-
lar viewpoint is to utilize Revelation 4:1, where John is bidden 
to "Come up hither," as an indication of the so-called secret 
rapture of the church! 
According to the pretribulationists-dispensationalists, the 
prophecies of the book of Revelation from 4:1 to 19:11 deal spe-
cifically with events that are to occur during a still-future 
seven-year period of earth's history just prior to Christ's visi-
ble advent. It is further believed by them that this seven-year 
period is the "70th week" of the prophecy of Daniel 9. The first 
69 of the 70 weeks of years allotted to the Jews in that prophecy 
extended to Christ's first advent. Then came an interlude in the 
form of the Christian dispensation. Finally this 70th week--seven 
literal years--will find fulfillment after the secret rapture of 
the church. At this time the Jews will again become prominent in 
fulfilling God's purpose. During this 70th week a personal anti-
christ will at first favor the Jews but in the middle of the week 
will turn against them and persecute them. 	 Finally, at the close 
of this seven-year period Christ will come and will set up an 
earthly millennial kingdom for the Jews. This kingdom, pretribu-
lationists think, is in reality the kingdom promised to the Jews 
by the OT prophets and then by Christ Himself, but which was never 
fulfilled because of their rejection of Him as Messiah. But God 
is true to His word; He does not fail His promise: therefore 
finally the kingdom will be given the Jews, in the millennial age! 
In addition to the tenuousness and unbiblical nature of the 
secret-rapture and dispensation ideas of the pretribulationists, 
other difficulties in their hermeneutic may be mentioned here. 
In the first place, the concept of such a literalistic and unal-
terable fulfillment of prophecies about ancient Israel, regardless 
of conditions and circumstances, flies in the face of the Bible's 
own principles. One may refer, for example, to Jeremiah's prophecy 
about two directions Jerusalem might take and which would lead to

--- Page 114 ---
104 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
very different consequences (see Jer 17:24-27). Also important 
is the fact that the NT looks on certain OT prophecies regarding 
ancient Israel as finding fulfillment in connection with God's 
new Israel, the Christian Church (see e.g., Acts 15:13-16 and 
Gal 3:26-29). 
In the second place, pretribulationists draw unwarranted dis-
tinctions regarding certain terminology in the Scriptures. They 
differentiate, for example, between Christ's use of the expres-
sions "kingdom of heaven" and "kingdom of God." The former is 
supposed to indicate the kingdom promised to the Jews and even-
tually to be set up as the millennial kingdom, whereas the latter 
is taken to depict God's over-all rule in the universe. In this 
regard, serious question may be raised inasmuch as there is no 
biblical evidence to substantiate such an application of the ter-
minology. Even more crucial are the facts that the context of the 
statements frequently defies such differentiation and that the two 
terms are used interchangeably by the Gospel writers. 
This leads us to a further point of great hermeneutical sig-
nificance--the pretribulationist contention for the need of "right-
ly dividing the word of truth" so as to distinguish in the Gospel 
records between things pertaining to the Jews and things pertain-
ing to the Christians. For example, it is a common dispensation-
alist belief that Christ's Sermon on the Mount is a message for 
the Jews, not the Christians. What basis can there be for this 
kind of arbitrary treatment of the text, except that it arises as 
a natural consequence from other unwarranted and unfounded presup-
positions? 
By no means have all conservatives in America adopted dispen-
sationalism. There are nondispensationalist premillenarians, 
among whom Seventh-day Adventists stand out as a prominent group. 
There are also a number of amillennialists, especially in Christian 
Reformed and Dutch Reformed groups and among conservative Presby-
terians. Certain amillennialists, such as Floyd Hamilton in his 
Basis for Millennial Faith and Oswald Allis in his Prophecy and 
the Church, have given critiques of dispensationalism. Perhaps 
even more important is the work of George Eldon Ladd, a one-time 
pretribulationist who has moved away from that position to a general 
kind of premillennialist futurism. Ladd, who is more impartial than 
might be expected from one who has left the movement, analyzes 
fairly and quite extensively in his book The Blessed Hope the weak-
nesses of dispensationalist theology on the matter of eschatology. 
He also provides some excellent chapters on the same topic in his 
Crucial Questions About the Kingdom of God. There seems little 
doubt but that dispensationalist-type hermeneutic has brought a 
certain amount of disrepute to conservative biblical scholarship,

--- Page 115 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 105 
and it has become a point of attack from conservatives who do not 
share such a hermeneutic. 
A further word may be said about futurism in general. Even 
futurists who are not pretribulationists tend to claim that the 
earliest church fathers held the futurist position. And, in fact, 
many church fathers of the first several centuries did speak of a 
personal antichrist who would dominate for 1260 days at the close 
of time rather than an antichrist system that would rule for 1260 
years. But it must be remembered that by virtue of the very time 
in which they lived, those church fathers were of necessity futur-
istic in their outlook concerning fulfillment of the prophecies of 
the book of Revelation. After all, most of Christian history was 
still ahead, and there was no concept of how long that history 
would last. The end was felt to be rather near, and hence a so-
called "futuristic" outlook would have been natural. But were 
those church fathers truly "futuristic" in their basic perspective? 
Perhaps this perspective is better revealed by their attitude 
toward the book of Daniel, and here the common interpretation of 
the major prophecies was in a historicist vein! 
One might just add from the biblical evidence that texts in 
1 John 4 and 2 Thessalonians 2 already imply more than a personal 
antichrist who was to reign for 3 1/2 literal years, for the con-
cept of a "spirit" of antichrist is set forth--something already 
in evidence as early as apostolic times. 
In closing this section, it should be noted that in recent 
years conservatives have begun to take an interest in the presence 
and meaning of apocalyptic in the synoptic Gospels--an area of 
study that heretofore has been dominated by liberal biblical schol-
arship. As indicative of this new thrust one may just mention the 
appearance in 1964 of George Eldon Ladd's Jesus and the Kingdom 
and in 1972 of Leon Morris' Apocalyptic. 
Summary and Conclusion 
We have traced briefly the history and the main trends that 
relate to the hermeneutical stance of present-day conservatives, 
especially in North America. We have noted the basic issues and 
questions relating to the inspiration of Scripture, and in this 
connection also have provided the essence of the Seventh-day 
Adventist position as enunciated by Ellen G. White. Furthermore, 
we have noted the growing respect for and use of scholarly tools 
for Bible study among conservatives. We have looked, too, at 
changing conservative attitudes toward scientific discovery and 
even scientific theories. Finally, we have touched briefly on

--- Page 116 ---
106 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
conservative biblical eschatology, with primary attention given to 
dispensationalism. 
In all this we have been able to observe that there has been 
a strong tendency for pendulum swings among conservatives. But 
balance should be a key word for sound Christian hermeneutic. The 
balance in such hermeneutic may readily be realized in the position 
enunciated by Ellen G. White with regard to revelation and inspira-
tion as we noted earlier. This position safeguards against the 
extremes of the liberals on the one hand and protects from the 
extreme views of verbal-inspiration adherents on the other hand. 
With respect to scientific discovery, here again it is neces-
sary for the conservative Christian to find balance by keeping his 
mind fully open to truth from both of God's books that reveal Him--
the Bible and the book of nature. The Christian must take care 
not to become overly enamored of his own theological views and pre-
suppositions; on the other hand, he should not be hasty to reject 
long-held theological positions simply because of a supposed scien-
tific discovery of the moment. While he needs to avoid the overly 
critical and sometimes injudicious attitudes of old-line fundamen-
talism, he should beware lest he subordinate his biblical under-
standing to certain scientific theories, as some new evangelicals 
now appear to be doing. It is important to be cognizant of the 
revelational intent of biblical passages, and not to seek scien-
tific understanding from Scripture where such scientific under-
standing is not intended. Equal care must be taken to shun any 
methodology or approach that would make the biblical text subserv-
ient to whatever scientific theories and scientific world view 
might be in vogue at any particular moment. God's truth transcends 
all of that! 
Finally, our quick glance at pretribulationism-dispensational-
ism has been given, first of all, because adherents of this belief 
are so numerous that most gospel workers who deal with conservative 
Christians to any significant degree are highly likely to encounter 
the view. Moreover, importance may be attached to the fact that 
the dispensationalist-type hermeneutic provides an example not only 
of the manner in which unsound principles can lead to erroneous 
conclusions but also of the way in which discredit can be brought 
upon conservatives when they lack sound scholarly methodology in 
their work. Finally, the history of dispensationalism portrays, 
once again, the tendency of the pendulum to swing too far--this 
time away from the postmillennialism so popular in some conserva-
tive circles when Darby's ideas reached America. 
There is always the danger of moving too far and too fast in 
any direction. The history of conservative Protestant Christianity

--- Page 117 ---
Conservative Biblical Studies in America 	 107 
in America unfortunately illustrates this fact. However, many 
conservative Protestant Christians in America do recognize that 
God is a God of balance, and they seek to be established by Him 
"in every good word and work" (2 Th 2:17).

--- Page 118 ---
Associate editor of the REVIEW AND 
HERALD, Washington, D.C., since 1967, 
Don F. Neufeld was associate editor of 
THE SDA BIBLE COMMENTARY, editor of the 
SDA BIBLE DICTIONARY, editor of the SDA 
ENCYCLOPEDIA, and coeditor, SDA BIBLE 
STUDENTS' SOURCE BOOK. His denomina-
tional service began in Canada as a 
pastor, then Bible teacher at Canadian 
Union College. Andrews University con-
ferred on him the Doctor of Divinity 
degree in 1972.

--- Page 119 ---
7. Biblical Interpretation  
in the Advent Movement  
DON F. NEUFELD 
Review and Herald 
Publishing Association 
The hermeneutics of prophecy will be discussed first because 
the early unique emphasis of the Adventist movement was on proph-
ecy. General principles of hermeneutics will then be examined. 
Hermeneutics of Prophecy  
In the restricted sense, an Adventist is a member of the 
Adventist (or Millerite) movement, or of one of the bodies that 
sprang from it. In its broad sense, the term is sometimes used 
to describe one who believes that the personal Second Advent of 
Christ is near. Today the term is used almost exclusively in its 
restricted sense. This is the sense in which it is used in this 
chapter. Of the emergent bodies, only the largest--the Seventh-
day Adventist Church--will be considered. 
As one aspect of the general Advent expectation of the early 
19th century, the Adventist, or Millerite, movement flourished in 
America from 1840 to 1844. The leader of the movement was William 
Miller (1782-1849), a farmer and a Baptist preacher. He was joined 
by other ministers, notably Josiah Litch (a Methodist minister) 
and Joshua V. Himes (a minister of the Christian Connection). 
Estimates run from 200 to 800 ministers who during the height of 
the movement were identified with it. Estimates of followers 
range from a conservative 50,000 to a million. 
The principal feature of William Miller's preaching was the 
interpretation of apocalyptic Bible prophecy and the resulting 
announcement that the second coming of Christ was to occur in the 
"Jewish year" 1843, which would end in the spring of 1844. He 
based his argument for the expectation on several lines of proph-
ecy, principally the prediction of Dan 8:14, which stated, "Unto 
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be 
cleansed." By applying to this time period the year-day principle, 
a principle already in use among interpreters for centuries, he 
arrived at a period of 2300 years. The beginning date he found 
in Dan 9:25, "The commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem,"

--- Page 120 ---
110 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
which he applied to Artaxerxes' decree issued in 457 B.C. Simple 
subtraction brought him to his "Jewish year" 1843. To the cleans-
ing of the sanctuary he gave the primary interpretation of the 
cleansing of the earth at the Second Coming of Christ. 
When the "Jewish year" 1843 passed without the realization 
of the Second Advent, and the more specifically determined date 
of October 22, 1844, projected in the summer of that year, also 
passed, it became evident that there had been some basic error in 
interpretation. Miller and most of his followers of that time 
concluded that they had been mistaken in their calculation of the 
time, and they continued looking for the Advent to occur shortly. 
A group of his followers spiritualized the Advent and held that 
it had actually occurred on the anticipated date. Restudying the 
Millerite positions, another group concluded that whereas they 
could find no error in the calculations by which October 22, 1844, 
had been derived, there was some mistake in the event expected. 
Some from this group, concentrating on the term sanctuary, became 
convinced that there was no biblical evidence for the Millerite 
assertion that this earth was the sanctuary to be cleansed by fire 
at the Second Advent. This little handful became the pioneers of 
the Seventh-day Adventist Church. 
Tracing the word sanctuary in the Scriptures, this minority 
group noted that the Bible speaks first of an ancient sanctuary, 
or tent, at which the Israelites worshiped in the wilderness. 
This portable tent was later replaced by Solomon's Temple and 
still later by Zerubbabel's. But Zerubbabel's temple, enlarged 
and beautified by Herod the Great, was destroyed in A.D. 70, and 
with its destruction the Israelite sanctuary passed out of exist-
ence. Hence this sanctuary could not be the sanctuary designated 
in Dan 8:14 to be cleansed in 1844, the terminal date for the 
2300 years. 
But they noted that the Bible speaks of another sanctuary, 
one in heaven, after which the earthly had been patterned, to 
which Jesus Christ ascended after the resurrection and in which 
He functions as High Priest. This, they concluded, must be the 
sanctuary of Dan 8:14, for it was the only sanctuary mentioned in 
the Bible that was in existence in 1844. In the book of Hebrews, 
where this heavenly sanctuary is described, they noted a reference 
to a cleansing (Heb 9:23), a work they concluded the heavenly High 
Priest commenced in 1844. In a brief but unspecified time they 
expected Him to return to the earth to gather His people. 
Although the Seventh-day Adventist Church had its roots in 
Millerism, the church took a direction of its own. Nevertheless 
"they [members of this group] regarded themselves as the true

--- Page 121 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 111 
successors of the movement, as retaining and carrying on to com-
pletion the main principles of Millerite doctrine and correcting 
and clarifying the misunderstanding that had caused the disappoint-
ment and had resulted in the repudiation of the 1844 message by 
the leaders."--SDA Encyclopedia, p. 796. 
Turning now to our investigation of the hermeneutics (pro-
phetic and general) of Adventists, we begin with that of the 
Millerites, then follow with that of the Seventh-day Adventist 
Church. The Millerite movement was an interdenominational move-
ment. Its adherents came from many churches and, although embrac-
ing Miller's teachings, continued to hold membership in their 
churches if so permitted. The rallying point in Millerism was 
belief in an imminent advent and the ending of human probation at 
that advent. In other doctrinal positions, adherents held gener-
ally to the teachings of their respective religious bodies. Thus 
there was no unified doctrinal position among the Millerites. 
By what hermeneutical principles did Miller arrive at his 
conviction that the Advent was to be expected about the year 1844? 
Three schools of prophetic interpretation were in existence when 
the Millerite movement began to flourish: (1) Preterism, the 
belief that the major portion of the book of Revelation was ful-
filled long ago; (2) historicism, the belief that the events of 
Revelation have been fulfilling all through history, with some 
having been fulfilled, others being fulfilled, and still others 
yet to be fulfilled in the future; and (3) futurism, the belief 
that what is predicted from Rev 4 onward is yet to take place; 
nothing has been fulfilled, nor will it be fulfilled until just 
before the end of this age. 
Futurism originated with Ribera, the Spanish Jesuit who in 
1590 published a commentary of Revelation. In the early 19th cen-
tury futurism took root among Protestants. Today it dominates the 
portion of the Protestant scene that is most vocal in the area of 
prophecy and its fulfillment. 
Miller belonged to the historicist school. He looked in his-
tory for fulfillments of the various features of the visions of 
John the revelator and, for that matter, of Daniel also. He be-
lieved that both prophets gave an outline of history from their 
day to the end of time. He did not originate the historicist 
system; many scholars before him had followed this system, and 
many in his day held it. 
In fact, the Reformers were historicists. George Eldon Ladd 
says that "this 'historical' type of interpretation with its ap-
plication of the Antichrist of papal Rome so dominated the Prot-

--- Page 122 ---
112 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
estant study of prophetic truth for three centuries that it has 
frequently been called 'the Protestant' interpretation."--The 
Blessed Hope, p. 32. 
Albertus Pieters calls historicism "the standard Protestant 
interpretation."--Studies in the Revelation of St. John, p. 43. 
In other words, although initially independent, Miller and 
his associates actually built on the work of their predecessors, 
retaining much of what had already been developed by a methodology 
that had been practiced for centuries. Into the general pattern, 
which had already been established, they inserted a few unique 
ideas. 
This building on the past has been abundantly demonstrated 
by L. E. Froom in his four-volume work The Prophetic Faith of Our 
Fathers. He lists scores of interpreters who expected the end of 
the 2300 days sometime around 1844 or 1847, although they differed 
as to the events to be expected at that time. 
In his discourses Miller frequently referred to the rules by 
which his conclusions were reached. He firmly believed that only 
if correct principles of interpretation are applied can correct 
conclusions be arrived at. 
A discussion of Miller's rules appears in his introduction 
to his printed lectures Evidence from Scripture and History of 
the Second Coming of Christ, about the Year 1843. His 1836 edition 
contained 16 lectures; his 1840 edition, 19. Following is a sum- 
mary of his rules: 
1. Much of the message of prophecy is communicated by sym-
bols. For example, beasts represent kingdoms; and water, people. 
2. All figures have both a literal and a metaphorical mean-
ing. Thus, literally, a beast would represent a kingdom; but 
metaphorically, for example, if it were a lion, the power to rule. 
3. The literal meaning of a figure is discovered by finding 
other Scriptures to explain the figure. Scripture must be com-
pared with Scripture. 
4. There is unity in the Scriptures. One prophecy comple-
ments another. "There never was a book written that has a better 
connection and harmony than the Bible." 
5. The biblical student must select and bring together every 
part of the subject he wishes to investigate.

--- Page 123 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 113 
6. The smallest unit, the word, must be given its scripture 
meaning. 
7. The larger unit, the sentence, must have its proper bear-
ing. 
8. The word and sentence must have their proper bearing in 
the grand whole. 
How did the Millerites in particular or how do historicists 
in general determine which events in history are fulfillments of 
specific prophecies? They examine closely the specifications of 
prophecy, then study secular and religious history to find a cor-
responding event. To verify whether the true historical event 
has been discovered Miller suggested the following: 
"If you find every word of the prophecy (after the figures 
are understood) is literally fulfilled, then you may know that 
your history is the true event. But if one word lacks a fulfill-
ment, then you must look for another event or wait its future 
development. For God takes care that history and prophecy doth 
agree, so that the true believing children of God may never be 
ashamed."--Views of the Prophecies and Prophetic Chronology, 
Selected from Manuscripts of William Miller with a Memoir of His 
Life; by Joshua V. Himes, 1841, p. 22. 
Besides requiring a thorough knowledge of Scripture, the 
historicist method demands also a thorough knowledge of history. 
Group effort bringing together minds skilled in various disciplines 
is important. But it should be remembered that by the time Miller 
did his work the basic interpretations of the books of Daniel and 
Revelation had already been set forth by various expositors in 
commentaries or in works on prophecy. After his initially inde-
pendent study, Miller criticized his own conclusions and examined 
all objections. On the basic outlines of prophecy, for example, 
the four beasts of Dan 7, he found himself in agreement with the 
expositors. But he reached certain independent conclusions. Thus 
he stood on the shoulders of his predecessors. His associates in 
turn stood on his shoulders and corrected and clarified some of 
his positions. 
In turn the Seventh-day Adventist interpreters later correc-
ted and clarified earlier prophetic positions. So far as apoca-
lyptic hermeneutical principles are concerned, Seventh-day Advent-
ists introduced few if any new principles, though they enlarged 
and systematized the interpretation particularly of the two apoca-
lyptic biblical books Daniel and Revelation. In 1882 they pub-
lished a book entitled Thoughts Critical and Practical on the Book

--- Page 124 ---
114 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
of Daniel and Revelation, which had already appeared as two sepa-
rate volumes, the one on revelation first printed in 1867, and the 
one on Daniel in 1873. The author, Uriah Smith (1832-1903), be-
came a Sabbath-keeping Adventist about the end of 1852 and in 1855 
became one of the editors of the primary church publication, The 
Review and Herald, and served as editor for many years. He also 
authored several other theological books. The book has gone 
through many editions and some revisions. 
The book takes the historicist principle for granted. The 
introduction of the 1897 edition argues against those who spirit-
ualize prophetic fulfillments. 
"There are two general systems of interpretation adopted by 
different expositors in their efforts to explain the sacred Scrip-
tures. The first is the mystical or spiritualizing system invented 
by Origen, to the shame of sound criticism and the curse of Chris-
tendom; the second is the system of literal interpretation, used 
by such men as Tyndale, Luther, and all the Reformers, and furnish-
ing the basis for every advance step which has thus far been made 
in the reformation from error to truth as taught in the Scriptures. 
According to the first system, every declaration is supposed to 
have a mystical or hidden sense, which it is the province of the 
interpreter to bring forth; by the second, every declaration is to 
be taken in its most obvious and literal sense, except where the 
context and the well-known laws of language show that the terms 
are figurative, and not literal; and whatever is figurative must 
be explained by other portions of the Bible which are literal. 
"By the mystical method of Origen, it is vain to hope for any 
uniform understanding of either Daniel or the Revelation, or of 
any other book of the Bible; for that system (if it can be called 
a system) knows no law but the uncurbed imagination of its adher-
ents; hence there are on its side as many different interpretations 
of Scripture as there are different fancies of different writers. 
By the literal method, everything is subject to well-established 
and clearly-defined law; and, viewed from this standpoint, the 
reader will be surprised to see how simple, easy, and clear many 
portions of the Scriptures at once become, which, according to any 
other system, are dark and unsolvable. It is admitted that many 
figures are used in the Bible, and that much of the books under 
consideration, especially that of the Revelation, is clothed in 
symbolic language; but it is also claimed that the Scriptures 
introduce no figure which they do not somewhere furnish literal 
language to explain. This volume is offered as a consistent expo-
sition of the books of Daniel and the Revelation according to the 
literal system."--Daniel and the Revelation (1897), p. 4.

--- Page 125 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 115 
In 1953-1957 the church published the Seventh-day Adventist 
Bible Commentary, a commentary on the entire Bible. This commen-
tary in the main endorses Smith's positions on the prophecies of 
Daniel and Revelation, at the same time enlarging and clarifying 
some of the interpretations. But the historicist principle remains. 
With futurism dominating Protestant prophetic interpretation, 
Seventh-day Adventists today are almost the only ones championing 
the historicist view. Characterizing the current Protestant scene 
in prophetic interpretation, Bernard Ramm does not even make 
specific mention of the historicist school. He says, "Among Prot-
estants three principal schools stand out: there is the premil-
lennial school that follows a literalistic method of prophetic 
interpretation; the amillennial school which is spiritualistic in 
its interpretation; and the post-millennial school that is midway 
between literalism and spiritualization. It is axiomatic that 
the 'root of their differences lies in the method of Biblical in-
terpretation."--Protestant Biblical Interpretation, pp. 155, 156. 
While Seventh-day Adventists are premillennialists so far as 
the literal meaning of the term is concerned (that is, they believe 
that the second coming of Christ precedes the millennium) they do 
not belong to the premillennial school that Ramm describes. Ramm's 
premillennialists look for the Temple to be rebuilt at Jerusalem, 
the Jews to turn in large numbers to Christ, and for probation to 
continue through the millennium. His amillennialists spiritualize 
many of the prophecies. 
This observation is significant in that it may show why cur-
rent Adventist prophetic interpretation is largely ignored by 
current scholars in the field of prophetic interpretation. 
One point of difference between the Adventist position and 
contemporary literalist premillennialism deserves attention. 
Whereas Miller and later Adventists affirmed that human probation 
ends at the time of the Second Advent, literalist premillennialists 
look for a millennium during which the Jews, restored, not only to 
Palestine, but also to God's favor, will rule over mortal kingdoms. 
Against these literalist notions the Adventists contended 
from the beginning. Their opposition was evident, for example, 
in a recommendation of the twelfth Millerite Second Advent Con-
ference (1842), from which literalist premillennialists were ex-
cluded: "All persons who reject the doctrines of temporal millen-
nium and the restoration of the Jews to Palestine, either before 
or after the Second Advent, and who believe the Second Advent of 
Christ and the first resurrection to be the next great events of 
prophetic history, be invited to enroll their names as member[s] 
of this conference."--The Signs of the Times, 3:69, June 1, 1842.

--- Page 126 ---
116 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The conference also affirmed: "No portion of the New Testa-
ment scriptures give[s] the most indirect intimation of the lit-
eral restoration of the Jews to old Jerusalem; we believe that 
the arguments drawn from the Old Testament prophecies are based 
on a mistaken view of those prophecies."--/bid. 
Concerning the millenarian view, Miller declared, "There is 
not a text, promise, or prophecy, written or given of God" to sup-
port the idea that the OT prophecies require a future restoration 
of the Jews.--Views of . . . William Miller, ed. 1842 by J. V. 
Himes, p. 233. 
Among the earliest clearest explanations of this viewpoint 
were several articles in the Review and Herald in 1856 and 1857 
by J. H. Waggoner. In a book on the subject he said, "All of God's 
purposes of grace to man, are conditional, [and] as the blessings 
set before them [the Jews] were conditional, they could claim them 
only on the fulfillment of the conditions. . . . We consider that 
this was conditional prophecy, the promises of which have been 
forfeited."--J. H. Waggoner, The Kingdom of God (1859), pp. 87-109. 
"This [the old] covenant was made at Horeb, and was condi-
tional, as recorded in Ex. xix. The Lord said to them, 'If ye 
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be 
a peculiar treasure unto me above all people."--J. H. Waggoner 
in Review and Herald, 9:77, Jan. 8, 1857. 
Adventists looked for the ancient prophecies to be fulfilled 
in principle in the Christian Church. The Boston Second Advent 
Conference (1842) affirmed that "the Old Testament prophecies 
. . . have been fulfilled in what the gospel has already done, or 
remain to be fulfilled in the gathering of all the spiritual seed 
of Abraham into the New Jerusalem."--The Signs of the Times, 3:69, 
June 1, 1842. 
Ellen White stated the principle as follows: "The glorious 
purposes which he had undertaken to accomplish through Israel were 
to be fulfilled. All who, through Christ, should become the chil-
dren of faith, were to be counted as Abraham's seed; they were 
inheritors of the covenant-promises."--Patriarchs and Prophets, 
p. 476. 
"That which God purposed to do for the world through Israel, 
the chosen nation, He will finally accomplish through His church 
on earth today."--Prophets and Kings, pp. 713, 714. 
The concept that prophecies may be conditionally stated is 
consonant with the general Adventist view--that man's will and

--- Page 127 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 117 
action may alter the manner in which God's purposes are carried 
out. 
On the other hand, literalist premillennialists emphasize the 
sovereignty of God and maintain that since God cannot go back on 
His promises to Abraham, Abraham's literal descendants in the 
future must experience fulfillment of the glorious promises. 
General Hermeneutical Principles  
We turn now to a consideration of general hermeneutical prin-
ciples followed by Adventists. The Millerite contribution was 
largely in the area of prophecy. In general principles the Miller-
ites represented the various churches out of which they came, which 
usually followed the Protestant hermeneutic. 
The group of Millerites that organized itself into the SDA 
Church also represented diverse backgrounds. This group faced the 
task of unifying its beliefs not only in the area of prophetic 
interpretation but also in the area of doctrine. This process 
went on over a period of some ten years, from 1844 to about 1855. 
During this time the leaders of the embryonic SDA Church conducted 
private Bible study groups and held numerous conferences. Arriv-
ing eventually at uniformity of belief, they organized themselves 
in 1860. 
Although no one set himself to the task of formulating a 
systematic hermeneutic by which Scripture interpretations were 
arrived at, certain principles were assumed or carried over from 
their Protestant denominational heritage. The nature of these 
principles became evident as doctrines were adopted and defended. 
Although no thorough and complete survey of Adventist herme-
neutic has yet been attempted, a modest survey of the literature 
of the formative period reveals many references to principles. 
1. Sola scriptura.  In the fifth issue of the earliest per-
iodical published by the group--Present Truth--edited by one of 
the founders of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, James White 
(1821-1881), appears this affirmation: "The Bible is our lamp, 
our guide. It is our rule of faith and practice."--P. 40. 
This same issue reaffirms the Bible's paramount position: 
"The Bible is our chart--our guide. It is our only rule of faith 
and practice, to which we would closely adhere."--P. 46. 
When in 1850 the Review and Herald succeeded Present Truth,

--- Page 128 ---
118 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
it too affirmed the primacy of the Bible: "Every Christian is 
therefore duty bound to take the Bible as a perfect rule of faith 
and duty. He should pray fervently to be aided by the Holy Spirit 
in searching the Scriptures for the whole truth, and for his whole 
duty. He is not at liberty to turn from them to learn his duty 
through any of the gifts."--1:70, April 21, 1851. 
Chiding Protestants for adopting the rule of the Romanists--
the Bible and tradition--J. N. Andrews (1829-1883), a prominent 
early minister, in a later issue enjoins: "We answer, make the 
word of God your only rule, receive what is written therein, and 
reject all beside. That the Protestant world now cherish an 
institution without foundation in Scripture, which was established 
by the gradual development of the great apostasy [sic], can only 
be accounted for by the fact that Protestants have adopted the 
rule of the Romanists in the place of their own."--Review and 
Herald 1:88, May 19, 1851. 
The question constantly raised by those who formulated the 
system of belief was "Is it sustained by the Word of God?" With 
respect to a certain unacceptable interpretation of Rev 1:10, the 
blunt denial was made, "We object to this view, because it is not 
sustained by the Word. In fact it is entirely destitute of sup-
port from the Holy Scriptures. Others may refer to the 'Fathers;' 
but we appeal to the Word of God."--Review and Herald 1:76, May 
6, 1851. 
In the face of conflicting views they would "take the Bible 
alone as the sure detector, as that which will discover unto us 
the truth."--J. N. Loughborough, Review and Herald 7:33, Sept. 4, 
1855. 
And again: "But in all doctrinal questions which arise in 
the theological world, there must be some ground upon which we 
can anchor; there must be some standard by which to test and 
decide conflicting opinions. Such a standard is the word of God." 
--Review and Herald 12:196, Nov. 11, 1858. 
2. The unity of Scripture. The unity of Scripture is 
affirmed in a reprint from American Messenger: "Throughout the 
whole Bible, there runs one great idea--man's ruin by sin, and 
his redemption by grace; in a word, Jesus Christ the Saviour. 
This runs through the Old Testament, that prelude to the New."--
Review and Herald 27:123, March 20, 1866. 
This assumption of the unity of Scripture is evident through-
out these early writings, where one part of Scripture is constantly 
made to explain another. Unity of authorship is assumed.

--- Page 129 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 119 
3. Let Scripture explain Scripture. This principle is a 
corollary of the principle of the unity of Scripture. The prin-
ciple is appealed to, for example, in an 1851 editorial by James 
White: "Scripture must explain Scripture, then a harmony may be 
seen throughout the whole."--Review and Herald 1:62, April 7, 1851. 
4. The words of the Bible must be given their proper mean-
ing. An unsigned filler in an 1855 issue states, "To ascertain 
what any passage says, consider what the words mean, according to 
their common acceptation and according to their usage elsewhere in 
the Scriptures; if they have more meanings than one, consider their 
connection and subject of discourse."--Review and Herald 7:38, 
Sept. 4, 1855. 
This rule was expanded, at least in practice, to include the 
definition of words from the original languages. Thus Hebrew and 
Greek terms are frequently quoted, and authorities cited as to 
meanings of the original terms. Those not versed in the original 
languages frequently resorted to various translations in order to 
clarify the meanings of words. 
5. Attention to context and historical backgrounds. With 
reference to Paul's writings in Romans 14:1-6 the direction is 
given: "If we would rightly understand the words of the Apostle 
we should first learn the subject of his discourse."--Review and 
Herald 1:68, Apr. 21, 1851. 
This rule is repeatedly demonstrated as the question is 
raised, What was the Bible writer speaking about, what was he say-
ing, and what did he mean by what he said? 
6. The Bible must be interpreted according to the plain, ob-
vious, and literal import unless a figure is employed. This rule 
was a recurring theme at a time when critics attempted to demolish 
the positions taken by the Adventists. D. P. Hall sets forth the 
problem: 
"I never realized the importance of being governed by correct 
principles of interpretation more fully than at the present time, 
just having had an interview with a minister of one of the popular 
denominations, who denied the literality and tangibility of every-
thing taught in the Bible. The second coming of Christ, death, 
resurrection, and in fact everything taught as the foundation of 
faith and hope, are by this mysticism swept away, and the past, 
present and future all thrown into chaos, and left without form 
and void. But there is a remedy for all this jargon and confusion, 
and it is to be found in the use of the literal principles of in-
terpretation. Interpret the language of the sacred writers as you

--- Page 130 ---
120 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
do the language of all others, and this difficulty would be speed-
ily obviated."--Review and Herald 6:17, Aug. 29, 1854. 
J. N. Loughborough (1832-1924) dealt with the same problem: 
"The beauty of Divine Revelation has been shut away from the minds 
of the common people, by their being taught, and supposing that 
the Bible does not mean what it says, or that the sense of the 
scripture writers is not contained in the scriptures themselves, 
but that they are mystical and have a hidden meaning. If this be 
a fact, we inquire, How shall we arrive at just conceptions of 
that word and its true interpretation?"--Review and Herald 7:34, 
Sept. 4, 1855. 
He continues: "We admit that figures are there used, and 
explained, but must claim that a plain statement should be under-
stood the same as when made in any other book. We can form no 
just conceptions of God's character as revealed in the word, if 
this be not the truth of the matter. If God had revealed his will 
in such a manner that man cannot understand it, and then pronounced 
in that word condemnation and death to those who did not obey his 
will, we should at once conclude that he manifested none of the 
character the word represents him as possessing."--Ibid. 
As to the mystical meaning and its source, Uriah Smith speaks 
of it as that "hidden, spiritual and mystical interpretation of 
the word of God, which was introduced by the fathers of the specu-
lative philosophy, and has been continued by their successors to 
the present time. Of these persons Mosheim (Church Hist. Cent. ii, 
part 2, chap. ii, S5) thus speaks: 'They attributed a double sense 
to the words of Scripture; the one obvious and literal, the other 
hidden and mysterious which lay concealed as it were under the vail 
of the outward letter. The former they treated with the utmost 
neglect, and turned the whole force of their genius and application 
to unfold the latter; or, in other words, they were more studious 
to darken the Scriptures with their idle fictions than to investi-
gate their true and natural sense.' But for this course on the 
part of early commentators, views opposite to the obvious and 
literal teaching of the Scriptures would undoubtedly never have 
obtained in the church."--Review and Herald 15:4, Nov. 24, 1859. 
This antipathy to a hidden mysterious meaning was not intended 
to rule out typology, or amplification of literal meanings, that 
a later inspired writer might bring out. The rule of permitting 
Scripture to explain Scripture took care of the latter. 
7. The typological principle. Perhaps the earliest clear 
statement of this principle after 1844 is the following by O. R. L. 
Crosier, who wrote on "The Law of Moses" in a Day Star Extra, Feb.

--- Page 131 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 121 
7, 1846. He said, "The Law should be studied and 'remembered' as 
a simplified model of the great system of redemption containing 
symbolic representations of the work begun by our Savior at his 
first advent, when he 'came to fulfill the Law,' and to be com-
pleted in 'the redemption of the purchased possession unto the 
praise of His glory.' Redemption is deliverance purchased by the 
payment of a ransom, hence it cannot be complete till man and the 
earth shall be delivered from the subjection and consequences of 
sin; the last act of deliverance will be at the end of the 1000 
years. To this the shadow of the Law extended."--P. 37. 
There are repeated instances of the application of the typo-
logical system with reference to the ancient ritual services. The 
key for the application, as noted earlier, the Seventh-day Advent-
ist founders discovered in the book of Hebrews, which speaks of a 
heavenly sanctuary where Jesus Christ ministers as priest. With 
reference to cleansing, it is stated that "it was therefore nec-
essary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be puri-
fied with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these" (Heb 9:23). 
Midstream Confirmation of Formative Hermeneutic  
As indicated earlier in this chapter, no complete survey of 
the Seventh-day Adventist hermeneutic from 1840 to the present has 
yet been attempted. The need for such a work may well be pointed 
up both by this chapter and this book. 
Some clues to the general principles of interpretation recog-
nized in the formative period have just been given. The tentative 
thesis that there has been little change in these principles may 
find some confirmation in an editorial appearing in two successive 
issues of The Signs of the Times (an Adventist church publication 
of evangelistic intent) from the pen of E. J. Waggoner, who was to 
play a significant role in the epochal 1888 General Conference of 
Seventh-day Adventists. 
In the second of these editorials (Jan. 6 and 13, 1887) Wag-
goner summarized the principles of interpretation, which were the 
subject of the first: 
We noted first, that the Bible is absolute truth and 
that anything that disagrees with it in the slightest par-
ticular must be false. Second, that the Bible, though 
composed of many books, is one Book with one Author; that 
there is perfect harmony in all its parts. Third, that 
the Bible contains all truth, because that by it a man

--- Page 132 ---
122 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
may be "thoroughly furnished unto all good works;" and 
that therefore it must be its own interpreter. Fourth, 
that one part of the Bible cannot be fully understood 
if taken out of its connection, or without reference to 
the Bible as a whole. There is no book in the Bible 
upon which light is not thrown by every other book in 
the Bible. 	 . . . 
Lastly, we showed that a term used in one place in 
the Bible must have the same meaning in every other place 
where it occurs, especially if the same subject is under 
consideration. 
Waggoner concluded the second editorial with cautionary com-
ments on the selection and use of commentaries. 
Hopefully, an outgrowth of this present symposium on herme-
neutics may be the careful and complete survey of the extensive 
denominational literature in order to trace the evidence for the 
church's hermeneutic. 
Hermeneutics Applied to Sabbath  
A demonstration of early Adventist hermeneutical principles 
may be seen in the Seventh-day Adventists' defense of the seventh-
day Sabbath, one of their cardinal doctrines. 
During the Millerite movement of the 1840's the "Sabbath" was 
discussed, but there was no widespread agitation. Sabbath-keeping 
among Millerites seems to have begun in Washington, New Hampshire, 
in 1844, when certain members of the Christian Church there read 
literature distributed by Rachel Oakes (later Preston), a Seventh 
Day Baptist. T. M. Preble, a prominent Millerite minister, living 
not far from Washington, New Hampshire, probably learned of the 
Sabbath through contact with the Sabbathkeepers there. He pub-
lished a tract on the Sabbath, which was read by Joseph Bates (1792-
1872), one of the founders of the SDA Church. Convinced, Bates 
himself wrote two tracts on the Sabbath, the second of which was 
studied by James White, the principal founder of the SDA Church, 
and his wife. Both began keeping the Sabbath in 1846. White and 
Bates were both strong leaders, and from them the Sabbath doctrine 
spread to other Adventists by means of conferences held in various 
areas, and through publications advocating the Sabbath. 
When the embryonic church began publishing a periodical in 
1849, The Present Truth, the first three issues--the first pub-
lished in July, 1849, and the next two in August, 1849--dealt 
almost exclusively with the Sabbath.

--- Page 133 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 123 
Their argument was that the Scriptures enjoin the keeping of 
the seventh day of the week, not the first day. They noted that 
the Sabbath was instituted at the end of Creation week (Gn 2:2, 3) 
and was made for man, generic man, not merely the Jew (Mk 2:27). 
It was embodied in the Decalogue (Ex 20:8-11) but originated before 
Sinai, as evident not only from Gn 2:3 but also from Ex 16, which 
describes the incident of the giving of the manna, which occurred 
some 30 days before Sinai. 
From such texts as Mt 5:17-33 they showed that the Decalogue 
is permanently binding and must not be confused with the ceremonial 
law, which was temporary. Turning to the NT they showed how the 
Sabbath was enforced there as well. 
These same issues of Present Truth examined the various Scrip-
tures usually quoted to prove the abolition of the Sabbath. It is 
in the examination of these that hermeneutical principles are 
appealed to, such as attention to historical backgrounds, impor-
tance of context, importance of the meaning of words and sentences, 
and analogy of Scripture. 
Another article examined the evidences presented for the 
first-day sabbath and found each one of them lacking when the 
accepted Protestant hermeneutic is applied. 
A reprint from Tract No. 6 of the American Sabbath Tract 
Society lists 20 reasons for keeping holy in each week the seventh 
day instead of the first day. Its reason No. 17 appeals directly 
to the cola scriptura principle: 
"17. Because, if the fundamental principle of Protestantism 
be right and true, that 'the Bible alone is the religion of Prot-
estants,' then the Seventh Day must be the true and only Sabbath 
of Protestants; for, unless that day of the week be kept, they 
have no scriptural Sabbath at all."--The Present Truth, Aug.,1849, 
p. 21. 
Number 18 chides the Protestants: "Because the pertinacious 
observance of the First Day of the Week, in the stead of the 
Seventh, has actually given occasion of great scandal to the Prot-
estant faith; it has caused the Papists to declare that Protestants 
admit the authority of human tradition in matters of religion; and 
it has led to intolerance and persecution."--Ibid. 
In a reference to the Reformers' position, number 15 says: 
". . . the leaders of the Reformation never claimed for the First 
Day the name of the Sabbath, and never enforced the observance of 
that day by any other authority than that of the Church."--Ibid.

--- Page 134 ---
124 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Summary and Conclusions  
A preliminary examination of the hermeneutical principles 
followed by the Adventists reveals that they worked within the 
established Protestant system and did not introduce new rules of 
interpretation. They appealed constantly to the Bible and the 
Bible only as their rule of faith and practice. They defended 
their faith by presenting what they frequently referred to as 
"Bible evidence." So strongly was their faith rooted in the Bible 
that they refused to write a formal creed, maintaining that the 
Bible was their creed. 
In the area of prophetic interpretation they followed, in 
general, the historicist system, the standard Protestant interpre-
tation. Today, it appears, they are almost the only champions of 
the system and of the conditional nature of God's promises to 
literal Israel. 
By the time the Seventh-day Adventist Church was organized 
in 1860 the over-all doctrinal system had been established. Since 
that time there have been clarifications and amplifications but 
no changes in doctrine. 
The same may be suspected concerning hermeneutical principles. 
These, inherited from a Protestant background, still serve the 
church today. As the church developed its educational system and 
established its seminary in 1934, these principles were reassessed, 
and they began to be more clearly and systematically stated. This 
present symposium is the church's first attempt to set forth in 
detailed and more complete form its present system of hermeneutics. 
Lesser attempts were made in the past, notably in the book Problems 
in Bible Translation, published in 1954. This work, although de-
signed primarily to deal with translation problems in the newly 
published Revised Standard Version, had several chapters dealing 
with hermeneutical principles: "The Transmission and Preservation 
of the Bible Text," "A Survey of Translation Problems," "The Place 
of Biblical Languages in the Life of the Church," "Principles of 
Biblical Interpretation," "Application of Old Testament Prophecies 
to New Testament and Later times." 
When the church produced a commentary on the Bible (1953-1958) 
it was necessary to have a clearly understood system of hermeneu-
tics as the base for the comments. Although this system was not 
formally stated except in part, various of its principles are 
appealed to and demonstrated in the various comments. But it 
remained for this symposium to attempt to set it forth in an organ-
ized way. In the light of the continuing conflict between the 
liberal and the new conservative branches of theology, it may prove 
a most timely attempt.

--- Page 135 ---
Biblical Interpretation in the Advent Movement 	 125 
The founders of the church laid the foundation well. None of 
them possessed advanced educational degrees. But their work has 
stood the test of the years and the scrutiny of scholarly minds. 
The doctrines they formulated are still the doctrines of the 
Seventh-day Adventist Church. They stand on sure footing, having 
now stood the test of the decades and the application of constantly 
refining disciplines in the area of biblical studies.

--- Page 136 ---
After 12 years of ministry in the Poto-
mac Conference of Seventh-day Advent-
ists, Professor Frank B. Holbrook joined 
the religion faculty of Southern Mis-
sionary College, Collegedale, Tennessee, 
in 1964. He is an associate professor 
of religion and recently served as act-
ing chairman of the religion department. 
He holds the Master of Theology degree 
from the Seventh-day Adventist Theologi-
cal Seminary of Andrews University.

--- Page 137 ---
PART 	 III 
INSPIRED WRITERS' INTERPRETATION 
OF INSPIRED WRITINGS 
8. New Testament Uses and Interpretation  
of the Old Testament  
FRANK B. HOLBROOK 
Southern Missionary College 
No serious interpreter of the Bible can fail to recognize 
the significance of the principles by which the NT writers inter-
preted the OT. Although the principles are seldom explicitly stat-
ed, they can be derived by careful analysis. Such an attempt is 
made in this paper. It is considered a vital link in the herme-
neutic chain as an attempt is made to discover inspired writers' 
use of inspired writings. 
Even a casual reading of the NT will impress the reader with 
the fact that it is replete with OT citations and allusions, al-
though scholars will differ on the count of direct quotations. 
The writings most often cited are the Psalms, located in the third 
division of the Hebrew Scriptures. Of the books of Moses, Deuter-
onomy is the most often directly quoted. Isaiah is the favorite 
prophet. Some OT statements such as Is 6:9, 10, are repeatedly 
cited. If Is 53 were to be lost, it has been suggested that the 
gist of its message could be recovered by means of NT citations 
and allusions. 
The book of Revelation makes no direct citations to the OT. 
An analysis of its contents, however, reveals it to be saturated 
with OT imagery. For an example the reader may wish to compare 
the language John uses to describe mystic Babylon (Rev 14-19) and 
the prophetic statements regarding ancient Babylon as penned by 
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel. (See charting, SDA BC, Vol. VII, 
866-896).

--- Page 138 ---
128 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Some Basic Presuppositions of the NT Writers  
1. The OT is authoritative for faith and practice. The NT 
writers in harmony with the viewpoint of Christ regarded the OT as 
normative Scripture, the "oracles of God" (Zogia tou theou), "liv-
ing and active" (Rom 3:2; Heb 4:12, RSV). (All citations herein-
after are from the RSV). Peter views the Word of God as vital seed, 
"imperishable," "living and abiding" which, if planted in the 
heart, will bring about a new life (see 1 Pe 1:23). Paul refers 
to the OT as "holy scriptures" (graphais hagiais) and "sacred 
writings" (hiera grammata) (Rom 1:2; 2 Ti 3:15). 
The NT writers do not see the OT as ever diminishing in value 
for the Christian. "For whatever was written in former days," de-
clares the apostle Paul, "was written for our instruction, that by 
steadfastness and by the encouragement of the scriptures we might 
have hope" (Rom 15:4). With reference to the experiences of an-
cient Israel he says, "They were written down for our instruction, 
upon whom the end of the ages has come" (1 Cor 10:11). 
2. The Holy Spirit is the divine author of the OT. The NT 
writers acknowledge that there is but one Author behind the many 
human writers who wrote. "The scripture had to be fulfilled, 
which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand by the mouth of David" 
(Acts 1:16). "Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says. . . ." "By this 
the Holy Spirit indicates. . . ." (Heb 3:7; 9:8). "No prophecy 
ever came by the impulse of man, but men moved by the Holy Spirit 
spoke from God" (2 Pe 1:21). In one instance the apostle Peter 
asserts that the Spirit who moved the prophets to write of the 
Saviour's sufferings and glory was "the Spirit of Christ" (1 Pe 1: 
10, 11). 
3. Divine revelation is progressive in nature. Although the 
NT writers recognize and acknowledge the divine authority of the 
OT, they are conscious of the Holy Spirit's witness also through 
themselves (see Eph 3:5). The OT was promise and shadowy outline. 
NT writers were witnessing to the glorious fulfillment of the prom-
ise in Jesus of Nazareth, whom they declared to be the long-
looked-for Messiah (see Acts 17:3). The apostle Paul proclaimed 
to his listeners, "We bring you the good news that what God pro-
mised to the fathers, this he has fulfilled to us their children 
by raising Jesus" (Acts 13:32, 33). 
That the NT writers recognized the principle of progressive 
revelation--a gradual unfolding of the divine plan through suc-
cessive ages--is seen by the opening statement in the epistle to 
the Hebrews. "In many and various ways God spoke of old to our 
fathers by the prophets; but in these last days he has spoken to

--- Page 139 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 129 
us by a Son" (Heb 1:1, 2). In the Son they perceived God had giv-
en mankind the fullest disclosure of Himself, the capstone to the 
edifice of revealed truth. 
4. There is unity between the OT and the apostolic witness. 
The NT writers do not view their witness as a new gospel or as a 
new religion different from that taught by the OT. Rather, they 
assert an inseparable unity between the witness of the OT and their 
own. Christians are admonished to "remember the predictions of 
the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior 
through your apostles" (2 Pe 3:2). 
The NT writers supply both historical facts and spiritual in-
sights that supplement and illuminate the OT. For example, Paul 
notes the names of the magicians with whom Moses contended in Phar-
aoh's court (see 2 Ti 3:8). Genesis does not state that Noah 
preached to his contemporaries about the coming Flood with a call 
to repentance. But the NT informs that he was "a herald of right-
eousness" and taught righteousness by faith (2 Pe 2:5; see Heb 11: 
7). The OT sets forth the fact that the earth was created by a 
personal God. The NT writers illumine this truth by observing that 
God created the world through the agency of Jesus Christ (see Heb 
1:1, 2; Jn 1:1-3, 10). Were it not for the illumination provided 
in the book of Hebrews, the ancient ritual of Israel's tabernacle 
and temples would be largely meaningless. But viewed in the light 
of the NT the ancient ritual reflects back a broader understanding 
of the entire plan of redemption. 
The movement is in both directions. Salvation from sin 
through Jesus Christ would not be meaningful without the OT 
account of the fall. The two Testaments are like two acts of a 
play. They provide insights into each other, but the whole drama 
is more fully understood in the light of the conclusion--in this 
instance the NT. 
5. The historical records of the OT are accepted as genuine. 
The NT writers refer to numerous incidents for didactic purposes, 
but they never question their historicity. Some examples are the 
creation of Adam and Eve; the temptation of Eve by the serpent; 
the fall of man; the murder of Abel; Noah and the Flood; the suf-
ferings of Job. Many incidents are noted from the long history 
of Israel, including the miraculous experiences of Salaam, Elijah, 
and Jonah. 
6. The moral and spiritual truths of the OT are of permanent  
value. "For whatever was written in former days was written for 
our instruction. . . ." (Rom 15:4).

--- Page 140 ---
130 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
7. Christ is the focus of all divine action in the OT whether  
it be through historical experience, prophecy, or ritual worship. 
"To him [the Christ] all the prophets bear witness," states the 
apostle Peter (Acts 10:43). The whole Hebrew economy pointed for-
ward to Christ. He was the confirmation and the consummation of 
"the promises given to the patriarchs" (Rom 15:8). 
8. Christianity is the new Israel, composed of born-again  
persons whether of Gentile or Jewish origin. "For neither circum-
cision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. 
Peace and mercy be upon all who walk by this rule, upon the Israel 
of God" (Gal 6:15, 16). 
9. In Christianity there is a discontinuity with the typical  
system of Judaism. In the perspective of the NT writers the ritual 
types of the ancient worship have met the antitype in the person 
of Jesus Christ. The shadow has vanished in the illuminating pres- 
ence of the Substance. 	 "For since the law has but a shadow of 
the good things to come instead of the true form of these reali-
ties, it can never . . . make perfect those who draw near. . . . 
For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take 
away sins. . . . But . . . Christ . . . offered for all time a 
single sacrifice for sins" (Heb 10:1-4, 12). 
10. God's Word is valid in translation. This presupposition 
is evident in that the NT writers felt free to use different ver-
sions of the Scriptures that were available to them. For this 
reason a reader of the NT may be puzzled by the form of a quota-
tion when he compares it with the original statement in the OT. 
He may note that at times it does not read exactly as the verse 
reads in the OT. He also may be disconcerted by the fact that at 
times he cannot even find the NT citation in his OT. For example 
the quotation, "Let all God's angels worship him" (Heb 1:6) is not 
found in our common versions of the OT. 
The NT writers were a part of a multilingual environment. 
Archaeological evidence indicates that the three languages--
Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek--were used by the Jews in first-
century Palestine. Our knowledge is sketchy, but it may be that 
the NT writers or their amanuenses could speak and read in one or 
more of these common tongues, and the OT was available to them in 
Hebrew, Greek, and the interpretative Aramaic translations known 
as Targums. Although the variants between these several sources 
seem to have been of no concern to the NT writers (who were more 
interested in the general thrust of the statement), a word about 
each of them might be of help in explaining how citations from 
these sources would vary at times from the Masoretic Hebrew text 
type (abbr. MT), from which our English and other translations of 
the OT are made today.

--- Page 141 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 131 
(a) Greek.  Sometime during the 3d to the 2d centuries B.C. 
the Hebrew Scriptures were translated into the Greek language for 
the benefit of Greek-speaking Jews. This Greek version, known as 
the Septuagint (abbr. LXX), became the version that Christians 
used as they carried the gospel to the Greek-speaking peoples of 
the Mediterranean world. Most of the OT quotations cited by the 
NT writers are drawn from the LXX. This does not mean that a 
given quote is identical in every detail with the LXX, but it 
appears to be largely, if not entirely, derived from this version. 
The citations by Luke and those in the book of Hebrews are the 
most closely related to the LXX. 
Some reasons why LXX citations may vary from the MT are as 
follows: (1) The LXX translator may have read the unpointed 
(without written vowels) Hebrew text differently from the way the 
later Masoretes did. For example, in the OT statement: "Israel 
bowed himself upon the head of his bed" (Gn 47:31), the consonants 
for bed are "mtth." The LXX translators read the term as matteh, 
"staff," but the later Masoretes read it as mittah, "bed." Con-
sequently the OT reads bed (based on the MT), but the book of 
Hebrews, drawing from the LXX, reads that Jacob bowed "in worship 
over the head of his staff" (cf. Gn 47:31; Heb 11:21). (2) Evi-
dence from the Qumran materials indicates that some LXX transla-
tors apparently worked from a Hebrew text type, which differed 
from what the Masoretes copied. (3) The NT writers may have 
derived some of their citations from non-Septuagintal versions of 
the OT in Greek. 
(b) Hebrew.  Before Rabbi Aqiba and his associates estab-
lished a Hebrew text (ancestor of the MT) at the beginning of the 
2d century A.D. there were evidently several Hebrew text types in 
circulation. Some OT citations are, of course, in agreement with 
the MT. In a few instances an OT citation seems to agree better 
with the Samaritan Pentateuch than with the MT or the LXX. This 
does not necessarily mean that the NT writer cited the Samaritan 
Bible directly, but it may mean that he cited a Greek non-
Septuagintal OT that preserved a reading from a Hebrew text type 
similar to the Samaritan form. 
Earlier it was noted that the statement "Let all God's an-
gels worship him," could not be found in the OT of our versions. 
The substance of the quotation, however, is to be found in the 
LXX (Dt 32:43), an English translation of which reads in part: 
Rejoice, ye heavens, along with Him, 
And Zet the sons of God worship Him; 
Rejoice, ye nations, with His people, 
And let all the angels of God be strong in Him.

--- Page 142 ---
132 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Although this passage is not in the MT, it was based on a Hebrew 
original, as is now evidenced by the discovery of this chapter of 
Deuteronomy in Hebrew at Qumran, which corresponds closely to the 
LXX. The citation in the book of Hebrews appears to be a confla-
tion of the two italicized phrases. 
(c) Aramaic Targums. It became a postexilic practice in the 
synagogues to render Scripture readings into Aramaic, which had 
become the common language of the people. These interpretative 
translations were eventually written down. A few are now known 
to have been written in pre-Christian times, others later. Some 
OT citations in the NT seem to have been influenced by these Tar-
gums, either in written or oral form. 
For example, Mark depicts Jesus citing the familiar passage 
of Is 6:9, 10, regarding Israel's spiritual dullness. The last 
part of the citation reads: "lest they should turn again, and be 
forgiven" (Mk 4:12). The LXX, however, has "and I shall heal 
them." The MT has also the term for heal. But the phrase in 
Mark's gospel is the same as is used in the Targum of Jonathan. 
Another example is Paul's application (Eph 4:8) of Ps 68:18 to 
Christ's ascension in which the last phrase reads: "and he gave 
gifts to men." Both the LXX and the MT have the word received 
instead of gave. But the Targum on the Psalms reads, "Thou hast 
given gifts to men." 
Hermeneutical Principles Employed by NT Writers  
Having examined some of the presuppositions of the NT writers, 
we may now attempt to induce and elucidate a few of the principles 
they used to interpret the message of the OT. 
1. Grammatical-historical principle. This principle indi-
cates that a passage is to be understood in its historical context 
and its natural grammatical sense. Christ and the apostles make 
many citations from the OT on this principle as they draw lessons 
of encouragement, warning, or reproof. For example, Jesus warns 
that the situation among men at the Second Advent will be similar 
to that in the times of Noah and of Lot. (And He cautions, "Re-
member Lot's wife" (see Lk 17:26-30, 32). James encourages be-
lievers to greater patience and earnest prayer by citing the 
examples of Job and Elijah (see Jas 5:11, 17, 18). Jesus corrects 
the Pharisees' view of divorce on the basis of the concession of 
Dt 24:1-4 because of the nation's low spiritual condition at the 
time of the Exodus by citing God's original purpose for permanency 
in the marriage relationship, as illustrated by the union of Adam 
and Eve at the beginning (see Mt 19:3-9 citing Gn 1:27; 2:24).

--- Page 143 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 133 
Such statements indicate that Jesus and the NT writers were accep-
ting the Scriptures in their natural sense and context. 
The apostle Peter's citation of Joel's prophecy (Joel 2:28, 
29) was in harmony with this principle. Joel had predicted that 
in some subsequent age God would pour out His Spirit upon mankind 
in a marked manner. In the events of Pentecost the apostle saw 
its fulfillment. "This is what was spoken by the prophet Joel" 
(Acts 2:16). 
2. Analogy of Scripture principle. The unity of Scripture 
is found in the Holy Spirit, who spoke through all the writers. 
Hence, what He revealed in one passage on a given subject may be 
compared by the reader with what He disclosed in another on the 
same topic in order to ensure full understanding of the subject. 
Jesus used this principle to establish the truth of His 
Messiahship. "And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he 
interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning 
himself. . . . 	 Then he said to them, 'These are my words which 
I spoke to you, while I was still with you, that everything writ-
ten about me in the law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms 
must be fulfilled.' Then he opened their minds to understand the 
scriptures. . . ." (Lk 24:27, 44, 45). 
A good example of the operation of this principle is Paul's 
citation in Rom 3:10-18 of six different passages to indicate the 
universal sinfulness of man and of the Jews in particular (Ps 14: 
1-3; 5:9; 140:3; 10:7; Is 59:7, 8; Ps 36:1). 
Related to the analogy of Scripture principle and certainly 
based on the same assumption of the Holy Spirit's authorship is 
the NT writers' practice of sometimes conflating, or fusing, two 
or more OT passages into a single quotation. In Rom 9:33 Paul 
says, "It is written, 
'Behold I am laying in Zion a stone 
[that will make men stumble, 
a rock that will make them fall;] 
and he who believes in him will not be put to shame.'" 
In this citation the apostle conflates Is 28:16 and a portion of 
Is 8:14, which is noted approximately by the brackets. 
Sometimes a quotation and an allusion may be combined. When 
Jesus said, "'Is it not written, "My house shall be called a house 
of prayer for all the nations"? [But you have made it a den of 
robbers]?" (Mk 11:17), He was not only citing Is 56:7, but He

--- Page 144 ---
134 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
may also have been alluding to Jer 7:11 (enclosed in brackets). 
The latter passage reads: "Has this house, which is called by my 
name, become a den of robbers in your eyes?" 
A citation may be made by a NT writer which is not a direct 
quotation but represents the gist of two or possibly more state-
ments. For example, John writes, "For these things took place 
that the scripture might be fulfilled, 'Not a bone of him shall be 
broken" On 19:36). This statement combines the thought of Ex 
12:46 regarding the Passover lamb, "you shall not break a bone of 
it," and Ps 34:20 applied Messianically, "He keeps all his bones; 
not one of them is broken." 
3. New-Israel principle. Passages of Scripture that once 
had significance but have lost that significance because of their 
conditional nature and nonfulfillment are applied to new situations 
by the NT writers. This principle is particularly employed in 
applying the prophecies about ancient Israel to the new Israel, 
Christianity. 
The author of Hebrews appeals to the prophecy of Jer 31:31-
34 as a divine prediction of a new order. "'The days will come, 
says the Lord, when I will establish a new covenant with the house 
of Israel and with the house of Judah. . . ." (see Heb 8:8-12). 
But God was not able to renew His covenant with the Jewish people, 
for they rejected the divine rule (cf. Lk 19:14). Nevertheless 
Christ became "the mediator of a new covenant" made with a new 
Israel to whom have been transferred the spiritual privileges and 
responsibilities that once belonged to the Hebrew people (Heb 9: 
15; see Mt 21:33-43; Gal 3:27-29). 
The apostle Peter, as another example, appropriates the an-
cient names and titles to the new Israel, and alludes to Hos 1:10; 
2:23 (which originally applied to ancient Israel) as finding par-
ticular fulfillment now in the new community of Christians. 
But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a 
holy nation, God's own people, that you may declare 
the wonderful deeds of him who called you out of dark-
ness into his marvelous light. Once you were no peo-
ple but now you are God's people; once you had not 
received mercy but now you have received mercy (1 Pe 2: 
9, 10). 
4. Englargement principle. A NT writer under inspiration 
may expand or extend the meaning of a given passage without deny-
ing or abrogating the permanent truth set forth in the original 
meaning. An example of this principle may be found in the famous

--- Page 145 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 135 
passage of Hab 2:4 to which Paul appeals twice in support of the 
doctrine of righteousness by faith (see Rom 1:17, Gal 3:11). 
"The righteous shall live by his faith." 
In the original prophecy, God informs Habakkuk of His design 
to permit the Babylonians to devastate sinful Judah. But though 
impending destruction is about to sweep over the nation God en-
courages His loyal ones to live calmly, trusting in Him. The NT 
writers are not ignorant of this context or its general truth, for 
the writer to the Hebrews makes a similar application of the pas-
sage to his readers. "For you have need of endurance . . . 'For 
yet a little while, and the coming one shall come and shall not 
tarry; but my righteous one shall live by faith, and if he shrinks 
back, my soul has no pleasure in him" (Heb 10:36-38). 
The apostle Paul under inspiration enlarges this faith prin-
ciple enunciated in Habakkuk to include not only trust in God dur-
ing physical calamity but also trust in God for spiritual salvation. 
The Christian lives by faith in God in all aspects of life. 
The RSV translation of the Habakkuk citation in Rom 1:17 and 
Gal 3:11 reads, "'He who through faith is righteous shall live.'" 
This translation of the Greek is grammatically possible, and it 
fits Paul's argument, but it is arbitrary, as is evidenced by the 
fact that the same translators render the same Greek phrase in 
Heb 10:38 as "'my righteous one shall live by faith" and footnote 
both references in Romans and Galatians with an alternate reading, 
"The righteous shall live by faith." The citation need not read 
differently from Habakkuk's original statement for the apostle to 
make his point on the faith principle. 
5. Augmentation principle. Under inspiration the NT writers 
often supply details to OT accounts that are not explicitly set 
forth in the original writing. For example, the OT does not in-
form us as to how Abraham resolved the terrible conflict in his 
mind regarding Isaac. God had promised descendants through his 
only son, but God also had commanded Isaac to be offered as a 
sacrifice. The writer to the Hebrews augments the account by ob-
serving that Abraham proceeded to carry out the command because 
"he considered that God was able to raise men even from the dead" 
(Heb 11:19). 
6. Accommodation principle. The NT writers were steeped in 
the language and imagery of the OT. It would be but natural for 
them at times to borrow the phraseology of an OT passage to express 
a truth. Some believe that Paul's use of Dt 30:12-14 in Rom 10:6-9 
is a case in point. In the OT context Moses was exhorting Israel 
to obedience, and observed that the nation was not ignorant of God's

--- Page 146 ---
136 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
will, neither need they search for it, for it was near, even "in 
your mouth and in your heart, so that you can do it." Since it 
is also true that righteousness by faith is not difficult to ob-
tain, the words of Moses with some adaptation nicely express the 
language of faith: 
But the righteousness based on faith says, Do not 
say in your heart, "Who will ascend into heaven?" (that 
is, to bring Christ down) or "Who will descend into the 
abyss?" (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead). 
But what does it say? The word is near you, on your 
lips and in your heart (that is, the word of faith which 
we preach); because, if you confess with your lips that 
Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised 
him from the dead, you will be saved. 
7. Adaptive translation. 	 The practice of interpretative 
translating of the Hebrew Scriptures in the synagogues was common 
among the Jews in postexilic times, as we have noted earlier. The 
resultant translations were known as Targums. 
An example of a targumic rendering may be the priests' cita-
tion of Mic 5:2 to Herod the Great regarding the birthplace of 
the Messiah. "And you, 0 Bethlehem, . . . are by no means least 
. . ." (Mt 2:6). In context the statement actually says the 
opposite: "But you, 0 Bethlehem . . . who are little. . . ." 
Rendering the passage interpretatively, the priests see the town's 
smallness in size evolving into its greatness in distinction as 
the birthplace of the Messiah, the great King. 
The Christian, Paul, apparently gives a similar adaptive 
translation of the 5th commandment: "'Honor your father and 
mother' (this is the first commandment with a promise), 'that it 
may be well with you and that you may live long on the earth'" 
(Eph 6:2, 3). The phrase that is in the parentheses is an injec-
ted commentary, but the italicized phrase is an interpretative 
rendering of the commandment. 
As spoken from Sinai the Ten Commandments were addressed to 
the nation of Israel, and so the commandment reads in part: "that 
your days may be long in the land which the Lord your God gives 
you" (Ex 20:12). That land was Canaan, as far as Israel was con-
cerned. But the Decalogue is applicable to all mankind in that 
it defines a man's duty toward God and his duty to his fellows. 
Consequently the apostle catches the spirit of the 5th command-
ment as it relates to all persons and renders this part: "that it 
may be well with you and that you may live Long on the earth" 
(Eph 6:3). Adaptive translations by NT writers may help to ex-
plain why some citations in the NT differ from the OT originals.

--- Page 147 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 137 
8. Christ principle. Christ asserted that there was a defi-
nite aim and focus in the OT. It was more than just a record of 
Israel's apostasies and religious experiences. Of the OT Scrip-
tures He affirmed: "they . . . bear witness to me" (Jn 5:39). 
Thus the NT writers see the supreme purpose of the OT to be the 
revelation of the Messiah by means of its prophecies, rituals, 
and precepts. 
(a) Prophecy. All direct Messianic prophecies are fulfilled 
in Jesus of Nazareth. "To him all the prophets bear witness" 
(Acts 10:43). An example is Jesus' own citation of Is 61:1, 2, 
which foretold the ministry of God's Servant. Jesus' assertion 
to His townsmen of Nazareth was startling: "Today this scripture 
has been fulfilled in your hearing" (Lk 4:16-21). 
(b) Ritual. The book of Hebrews evidences the fact that the 
NT writers regarded the tabernacle-temple sanctuaries, the sacri-
fices, and the Levitical priesthood as types and shadows of the 
heavenly sanctuary, the atoning death of Christ, and His high-
priestly ministry in the presence of God. The festivals also had 
typical significance, as Paul observes: "Christ, our paschal lamb, 
has been sacrificed" (1 Cor 5:7). 
(c) Precept. The NT writers see that the divine plan for 
the salvation of man was disclosed in the OT as well as in their 
own witness. (Salvation was by faith then as well as now.) Noah 
is designated "a herald of righteousness" (2 Pe 2:5), who because 
of the destruction of the Flood became "an heir of the righteous-
ness which comes by faith" (Heb 11:7). 
The assertion of the book of Hebrews is that "good news came 
to us [Christians] just as to them [Israel]; but the message which 
they heard did not benefit them, because it did not meet with faith 
in the hearers" (Heb 4:2). Paul argues in Romans that "the law 
and the prophets bear witness to it," that is, to the doctrine of 
righteousness by faith, and cites Israel's great heroes, Abraham 
and David, to show he is advancing no new doctrine (Rom 3:21; 4: 
1-8). Jesus expresses apparent surprise at Nicodemus' ignorance 
of the concept of the new birth. "'Are you a teacher of Israel, 
and yet you do not understand this?'" (Jn 3:10). 
9. Typical principle. A large proportion of NT citations 
seem to be torn from their original settings. This is particularly 
true of passages that are applied to Christ. We must not think 
the NT writers move irrationally through the Scriptures blindly 
selecting here and there. They must have moved on some valid her-
meneutical principle. The evidence would suggest that the NT wri-
ters at times used the principle of types.

--- Page 148 ---
138 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The Israelite was taught to take historical events seriously 
and to catch their spiritual overtones. For example, the forty 
years of manna in the wilderness were intended to teach Israel 
more than the simple fact that God could supply their daily bread. 
Moses points out the spiritual dimension God designed for them to 
grasp from this physical experience: "He humbled you and let you 
hunger and fed you with manna, which you did not know, nor did 
your fathers know; that he might make you know that man does not 
live by bread alone, but that man lives by everything that pro-
ceeds out of the mouth of the Lord" (Dt 8:3). 
The NT writers saw certain persons and events as historical 
types foreshadowing some aspect of Christ. For example, Paul sees 
in Adam "a type [tupos] of the one who was to come" (Rom 5:14). 
Inasmuch as Adam is so characterized, it would be natural for the 
NT writers under the illumination of the Holy Spirit to see in the 
anointed prophets, priests, and kings--and even in the chosen na-
tion of Israel itself--God-intended types of the ultimate Anointed 
One--the Prophet, Priest, and King, the Overcomer. 
In making these links between the OT and Christ it would 
appear that the NT writers employed the interpretative principles 
commonly used by the rabbis of Qal Wahomer (inference from minor 
to major) and Gezerah Shawah (construction of analogies) (see 
earlier chapter by Siegfried Horn, "Jewish Interpretation in the 
Apostolic Age"). 
For example, in Heb 1 a number of OT citations are applied 
to Christ. Two may be noted for the sake of illustration. The 
first citation is, "Thou art my Son, today I have begotten thee" 
(Heb 1:5; see Ps 2:7). The overtones of the psalm are very Mes-
sianic, but it also may have applied to David in a local setting, 
for the Lord is described as saying, "'I have set my king on Zion, 
my holy hill" (Ps 2:6) 	 (cf. Acts 4 :25 on Davidic authorship). 
But the NT writer using the principle of types may cite this pas-
sage with propriety as a reference to Christ. He sees David, the 
anointed king of Israel, as a type of Israel's ultimate King, the 
Messiah. Here is an analogy between David and his dynastic Heir. 
Furthermore, if David the king may be termed God's "son," how much 
more appropriate for God to designate David's greater descendant 
"my Son." 
The second passage cited reads, "'I will be to him a father, 
and he shall be to me a son" (Heb 1:5). The quotation is from 
2 Sa 7:14 and is God's statement to David regarding the estab-
lishment of David's dynasty. The words actually refer to Solomon, 
who succeeded David on the throne. Again an analogy may be made 
and the Qal Wahomer principle applied. If God regards the

--- Page 149 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 139 
anointed king, Solomon, who builds His physical Temple as "son," 
how much more does He regard as "Son" the Messiah, who is greater 
than Solomon, and who will build the spiritual temple of the Lord. 
Robert Gundry concludes from his analysis of both the formal 
citations and allusions in the Gospel of Matthew that many of 
them which are applied to Jesus rest on the following typical pat-
tern. This may also be the pattern used by the other NT writers: 
Jesus is the greater Moses. 
Jesus is the greater Son of David. 
Jesus is the representative prophet. 
Jesus is the representative Israelite. 
Jesus is the representative righteous sufferer 
rejected by men. 
Perhaps the difficult passages in Matthew--such as his cita-
tion of Is 7:14 (1:22, 23), Hos 11:1 (2:15), and Jer 31:15 (2:17, 
18), as well as Paul's citation of the civil law pertaining to 
oxen in Dt 25:4 (1 Cor 9:8-10)--may be best explained by suggest-
ing that the writers were employing the typical principle with 
those of analogy and of inference from minor to major. 
10. Ethical principle. The NT writers saw in the OT a pre-
cious storehouse of materials for moral instruction in Christian 
living. Human nature being the same in all ages, what was valid 
and permanent moral instruction in one age would be valid in an-
other age if a similar situation arose. "All scripture is in-
spired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for cor-
rection, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God 
may be complete, equipped for every good work" (2 Ti 3:16, 17). 
Consequently, under the Holy Spirit they continually applied the 
moral instruction to Christian living. Matthew recorded Christ's 
Sermon on the Mount, the Saviour's great exposition of the Deca-
logue. Both Paul and John spoke with regard to the principle of 
impartial love as fulfilling the obligations of the second table 
of the law (Mt 5-7; Rom 13:8-10; 1 Jn 3:14, 15). The counsels 
on practical godliness that may be found in the epistle of James 
and that generally make up a part of each of Paul's letters, have 
roots in the OT. 
Conclusion 
The above sketch is an attempt to induce from the NT the 
basic presuppositions with which the NT writers approached the OT 
scriptures, and the hermeneutical principles they employed in 
interpreting its contents to the church and to the world.

--- Page 150 ---
140 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
It must not be forgotten that in such a study we are analyzing 
men who themselves were being moved by the Holy Spirit to transmit 
the fullness of the gospel, which was but outline and shadow in 
the OT. Under inspiration of the Holy Spirit they saw divine har-
monies that the uninspired expositor might not be able to perceive 
with his limited comprehension. 
The Christian expositor would be in harmony with the basic 
presuppositions of the NT writers. But with the NT writings also 
vouchsafed to him, he will be obliged to view the OT through the 
further illumination, enlargement, and clarification of the NT 
witness. 
As an uninspired investigator of the Scriptures the Christian 
expositor will be largely limited to the grammatical-historical 
and analogy of Scripture principles of interpretation. He may 
accommodate a passage in order to present, perhaps, a universal 
truth, but his audience should know he is not giving an exposition 
in context. Adaptive translating as apparently done by the NT 
writers is similar though not identical to paraphrasing. A para-
phrase of a scriptural passage can often be helpful in explaining 
its meaning. And of course the Scriptures are the minister's 
authority for the presentation of truths related to Christian 
ethics. 
With reference to the principles of enlargement, augmentation, 
types, as well as the Christ principle and new Israel principle, 
the uninspired expositor must limit himself to searching out what 
the inspired writers themselves disclosed. In this task and privi-
lege his constant prayer to the Author of all truth must ever be: 
"Open my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law" 
(Ps 119:18). 
READING LIST  
Bright, John. The Authority of the Old Testament. Nashville: 
Abingdon Press, 1967. 
A general study on the authority of the OT and its place 
in Christian preaching. Contains a helpful discussion on the 
theological links between the two Testaments and the nature 
of OT types. 
Bruce, F. F. The Books and the Parchments. 3d rev. ed. Westwood, 
NJ: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1963. 
Helpful for understanding the text-form problems in OT 
citations.

--- Page 151 ---
New Testament Uses of the Old Testament 	 141 
Bruce, F. F. New Testament development of Old Testament Themes. 
Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1969. 
A survey of OT themes as further developed by the NT 
writers. 
Ellis, David J. "The New Testament Use of the Old Testament," 
A New Testament Commentary. Edited by G. C. D. Howley. 
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Pub. House, 1969. 
A general article with selected bibliography surveying 
various aspects of this subject from a conservative viewpoint. 
Ellis, E. Earle. Paul's Use of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids, 
MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1957. 
A useful work concerned with understanding the rationale 
underlying Pauline usage of OT citations. Compares Pauline 
exegesis with that of first-century Judaism. Contains appen-
dices cataloging Paul's citations and allusions. 
Gundry, Robert Horton. The Use of the Old Testament in St. Mat-
thew's Gospel. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1967. 
A doctoral dissertation (under F. F. Bruce) largely con-
cerned with an analysis of the text forms of OT citations 
both explicit and allusive in the Gospel of Matthew, together 
with a discussion of Matthaean hermeneutics. 
Smith, D. Moody, Jr. "The Use of the Old Testament in the New," 
The Use of the Old Testament in the New and Other Essays 
(Studies in Honor of William Franklin Stinespring). Edited 
by James M. Efird. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1972. 
Tasker, R. V. G. The Old Testament in the New Testament. 2d rev. 
ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co. (2d American 
ed.), 1968. 
A short work proposing to show the unity of the Testaments 
as evidenced by Christ and the NT writers. 
Wright, G. Ernest. God Who Acts. London: SCM Press, Ltd. (No. 8 
in "Studies in Biblical Theology"), 1952. 
A discussion of the significance to the Hebrew mind of 
historical events in OT times and their typical nature.

--- Page 152 ---
Book editor, Review and Herald Publish-
ing Association, Washington, D.C., 
Raymond F. Cottrell was senior associ-
ate editor of THE SDA BIBLE COMMENTARY 
and a major contributor to both it and 
the SDA BIBLE DICTIONARY and SDA ENCY-
CLOPEDIA. Ordained in 1937 while a 
missionary in Manchuria, he returned 
during the war years to Pacific Union 
College where he taught on the religion 
staff from 1941-1952. He has been at 
the Review since 1952. Andrews Univer-
sity conferred on him the Doctor of 
Divinity degree in 1972.

--- Page 153 ---
9. Ellen G. White's Evaluation and  
Use of the Bible  
RAYMOND F. COTTRELL 
Review and Herald 
Publishing Association 
Ellen G. White understood her primary role to be that of God's 
special messenger to the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Her task 
as she saw it was to point men and women to the Bible as the in-
spired, authoritative Word of God, to apply its principles to the 
experiences the church and its members encounter in the world 
today, and to guide them in their preparation for Christ's return. 
Attitude Toward the Bible  
Ellen White's attitude toward the Bible as reflected in many 
statements such as these is fundamental to a correct understanding 
of her use of it: 
The Bible is God's voice speaking to us, just as 
surely as though we could hear it with our ears.--
Testimonies, vol. 6, p. 393. 
The Holy Scriptures are to be accepted as an 
authoritative, infallible revelation of His will. 
--The Great Controversy, p. ix. 
The Bible is the only rule of faith and doctrine. 
--Fundamentals of Christian Education, p. 126. 
In our time there is a wide departure from their 
[the Scriptures'] doctrines and precepts, and there is 
need of a return to the great Protestant principle--
the Bible, and the Bible only, as the rule of faith 
and duty.--The Great Controversy, pp. 204, 205. 
The Spirit was not given--nor can it ever be 
bestowed--to supersede the Bible; for the Scriptures 
explicitly state that the word of God is the standard

--- Page 154 ---
144 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutic 
by which all teaching and experience must be tested. 
--The Great Controversy, p. ix. 
Concept of Her Relation to the Bible  
Ellen White considered her mission to be in fulfillment of 
Bible prophecy, particularly the promise of Joel 2:28, 29, repeated 
in Acts 2:17, 18: 
I recommend to you, dear reader, the Word of God 
as the rule of your faith and practice. By that Word 
we are to be judged. God has, in that Word, promised 
to give visions in the "last days"; not for a new rule 
of faith, but for the comfort of His people, and to 
correct those who err from Bible truth.--Early Writings, 
p. 78. 
She conceived of her ministry as a lesser light to lead men 
to the greater light, the Bible. She did not look upon her writ-
ings as superseding the Bible or as an addition to it or as "new 
light" but as clarifying the Bible and showing its relevance to 
the needs of God's people today: 
The Testimonies were not given to take the place 
of the Bible. . . . 
The Testimonies [are not] an addition to the word 
of God. . . . [But] God has seen fit in this manner to 
bring the minds of His people to His word, to give them 
a clearer understanding of it.--Testimonies, vol. 5, 
p. 663. 
The Lord has given a lesser light to lead men and 
women to the greater light.--Colporteur Ministry, p. 125. 
Ellen White describes one way in which, during the early years 
of the church, she became "a lesser light" to enable men to under-
stand the Bible: 
When they came to the point in their study where 
they said, "We can do nothing more," the Spirit of the 
Lord would come upon me, I would be taken off in vision, 
and a clear explanation of the passages we had been 
studying would be given me, with instruction as to how 
we were to labor and teach effectively. Thus light was 
given that helped us to understand the scriptures in 
regard to Christ, His mission, and His priesthood.--
Selected Messages, book 1, pp. 206, 207.

--- Page 155 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 145 
While acknowledging the primacy of the Bible, Ellen White 
claimed for her writings the same inspiration she attributed to 
it and insisted that there is basic harmony between the two: 
The Holy Ghost is the author of the Scriptures and 
the author of the Spirit of Prophecy.--E. G. White Letter 
92, 1900. 
"In ancient times God spoke to men by the mouth of 
prophets and apostles. In these days He speaks to them 
by the testimonies of His Spirit."--Testimonies, vol. 5, 
p. 661. 
The writings of Ellen White are as thoroughly permeated with 
Scripture as the air is with oxygen. They testify to her profound 
knowledge of the Bible, and when she encourages other people to 
study it with diligence and care she does so from the depth of her 
own experience. Whatever the subject, she thought--and wrote--
in the language and thought forms of Scripture. 
Attitude Toward Truth 
In Ellen White's counsel to others we may see a reflection 
of her attitude toward truth. Among the qualities of mind she 
commends are sincerity of purpose in seeking truth, dedication of 
mind and life to it, willingness to live in harmony with it, an 
earnest desire for it, willingness to learn, an open mind. She 
commends diligent, persevering systematic study; patient reflection; 
and where necessary exercise of suspended judgment: 
The spirit in which you come to the investigation 
of the Scriptures, will determine the character of the 
assistant at your side.--Testimonies to Ministers and 
Gospel Workers, p. 108. 
The perception and appreciation of truth, He [Christ] 
said, depends less upon the mind than upon the heart. 
--The Desire of Ages, p. 455. 
His [the seeker's] affections and all his capa-
bilities must be consecrated to the search.--Christ's 
Object Lessons, p. 112. 
Whenever men are not seeking, in word and deed, to 
be in harmony with God, then, however learned they may 
be, they are liable to err in their understanding of 
Scripture. . . . And it is only those who are following

--- Page 156 ---
146 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the light already given that can hope to receive the 
further illumination of the Spirit.--Testimonies, 
vol. 5, p. 705. 
Objective Frame of Mind  
The student of the word should not make his 
opinions a center around which truth is to revolve. 
He should not search for the purpose of finding 
texts of Scripture that he can construe to prove 
his theories, for this is wresting the Scriptures 
to his own destruction. The Bible student must 
empty himself of every prejudice, lay his own ideas 
at the door of investigation, and with humble, sub-
dued heart, with self hid in Christ, with earnest 
prayer, he should seek wisdom from God.--Counsels to 
Parents, Teachers, and Students, p. 463. 
If there is a point of truth that you do not 
understand, upon which you do not agree, investigate, 
compare scripture with scripture, sink the shaft of 
truth down deep into the mine of God's word. You 
must lay yourselves and your opinions on the altar 
of God, put away your preconceived ideas, and let 
the Spirit of heaven guide into all truth.--
Testimonies to Ministers and Gospel Workers, p. 476. 
The sin that is most nearly hopeless and incura-
ble is pride of opinion, self-conceit. This stands 
in the way of all growth.--Testimonies, vol. 7, pp. 
199, 200. 
Exacting Investigation 
Before accepting any doctrine or precept, we should 
demand a plain "Thus saith the Lord" in its support. 
--The Great Controversy, p. 595. 
We should never allow ourselves to employ arguments 
that are not wholly sound. . . . We should present 
sound arguments, that will not only silence our opponents, 
but will bear the closest and most searching scrutiny.--
Testimonies, vol. 5, p. 708. 
[God calls for] a diligent study of the Scriptures, 
and a most critical examination of the positions which 
we hold.

--- Page 157 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 147 
God would have all the bearings and positions of 
truth thoroughly and perseveringly searched, with 
prayer and fasting. Believers are not to rest in sup-
positions and ill-defined ideas of what constitutes 
truth.--Counsels to Writers and Editors, p. 40. 
Diligence With Patience  
The most valuable teaching of the Bible is not 
gained by occasional or disconnected study. Its great 
system of truth is not so presented as to be discerned 
by the careless or hasty reader. Many of its treasures 
lie far beneath the surface, and can be obtained only 
by diligent research and continuous effort.--Signs of 
the Times, Sept. 9, 1906. 
There must be patient study and meditation and 
earnest prayer.--Testimonies to Ministers and Gospel 
Workers, p. 108. 
The Holy Spirit's Guidance  
Men must themselves be under the influence of the 
Holy Spirit in order to understand the Spirit's utter-
ances through the prophets.--Selected Messages, book 2, 
p. 114. 
No one is able to explain the Scriptures without 
the aid of the Holy Spirit. But when you take up the 
Word of God with a humble, teachable heart, the angels 
of God will be by your side to impress you with evi-
dences of the truth.--Selected Messages, book 1, p. 
411. 
Concept of the Nature of Scripture  
Prerequisite and basic to a viable hermeneutical methodology 
is an accurate understanding of such matters as the relationship 
between the divine and the human elements in Scripture, the nature 
of inspiration, the text and canon of Scripture, the progressive 
nature of revelation, and the unity of Scripture: 
"The Bible points to God as its author; yet it was 
written by human hands; and in the varied style of its 
different books it presents the characteristics of the

--- Page 158 ---
148 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
several writers. The truths revealed are all 'given 
by inspiration of God' (2 Tim. 3:16); yet they are 
expressed in the words of men. The Infinite One by His 
Holy Spirit has shed light into the minds and hearts of 
His servants. He has given dreams and visions, symbols 
and figures; and those to whom the truth was thus 
revealed, have themselves embodied the thought in human 
language. . . ."--Selected Messages, book 1, p. 25. 
The Bible is written by inspired men, but it is 
not God's mode of thought and expression. It is that of 
humanity. God, as a writer, is not represented. Men 
will often say such an expression is not like God. But 
God has not put Himself in words, in logic, in rhetoric, 
on trial in the Bible. The writers of the Bible were 
God's penmen, not His pen. Look at the different writers. 
--Ibid., p. 21. 
The Nature of Inspiration 
It is not the words of the Bible that are inspired, 
but the men that were inspired. Inspiration acts not 
on the man's words or his expressions but on the man him-
self, who, under the influence of the Holy Ghost, is 
imbued with thoughts. But the words receive the impress 
of the individual mind. The divine mind is diffused. 
The divine mind and will is combined with the human mind 
and will; thus the utterances of the man are the word of 
God.--Ibid. 
The Text and Canon of Scripture 
The Bible is the most ancient and the most compre-
hensive history that men possess. It came fresh from 
the Fountain of eternal truth, and throughout the ages 
a divine hand has preserved its purity.--Counsels to 
Parents, Teachers, and Students, p. 52. 
God had faithful witnesses, to whom He committed 
the truth, and who preserved the Word of God. The manu-
scripts of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures have been 
preserved through the ages by a miracle of God.--E. G. 
White Letter 32, 1899.

--- Page 159 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 149 
Revelation Progressive  
The Scriptures were given to men, not in a continu-
ous chain of unbroken utterances, but piece by piece 
through successive generations, as God in His providence 
saw a fitting opportunity to impress man at sundry times 
and divers places. Men wrote as they were moved upon by 
the Holy Ghost. There is "first the bud, then the blos-
som, and next the fruit," "first the blade, then the ear, 
after that the full corn in the ear." This is exactly 
what the Bible utterances are to us.--Selected Messages, 
book 1, pp. 19, 20. 
The Unity of Scripture  
The books of the Bible present a wide contrast in 
style, as well as a diversity in the nature of the sub-
jects unfolded. Different forms of expression are em-
ployed by different writers; often the same truth is 
more strikingly presented by one than by another. And 
as several writers present a subject under varied aspects 
and relations, there may appear, to the superficial, care-
less, or prejudiced reader, to be discrepancy or contra-
diction, where the thoughtful, reverent student, with 
clearer insight, discerns the underlying harmony.--
Ibid., p. 25. 
Ellen White's Biblical Hermeneutic  
Hermeneutical principles and procedures followed today by 
conservative Bible scholars were not in general use during Ellen 
White's lifetime. She nevertheless recognized these principles, 
advocated their use, and demonstrated them in her own exposition 
of Scripture. For instance, she commends attention to such things 
as the historical setting, the writer's personal characteristics 
and cultural background, his literary form and purpose in writing, 
the words, the context, the analogy of Scripture, textual variants, 
inaccuracies of translation, and literal/figurative language. 
When her purpose in writing and her mode of expression are taken 
into account, her use of Scripture comports both with the way in 
which later inspired writers of the Bible made use of earlier 
inspired writings and with sound contemporary biblical scholarship. 
Although an exhaustive analysis has yet to be made of the 
biblical hermeneutic commended and practiced by Ellen White, cer-
tain facets of it are clearly stated and illustrated in her pub-

--- Page 160 ---
150 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
lished works. One factor that could well be given priority in 
any future study is an occasional exposition of Scripture in which 
she attributes to a passage a meaning that is not readily apparent 
from an application of the hermeneutical principles she herself 
commends--a practice demonstrated at times by the Bible writers 
themselves. 
What we might call Ellen White's biblical hermeneutic takes 
note of: 
1. The Historical and Cultural Setting. She recognized the 
importance of the historical and cultural setting and the meaning 
a passage of Scripture had for those to whom it was first addressed, 
as prerequisite to correct understanding of the passage. In her 
own exposition of Scripture--notably in the Conflict of the Ages 
Series--she habitually devotes considerable attention to these 
factors. 
An understanding of the customs of those who lived 
in Bible times, of the location and time of events, is 
practical knowledge; for it aids in making clear the 
figures of the Bible and in bringing out the force of 
Christ's lessons.--Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and 
Students, p. 518. 
Understanding what the words of Jesus meant to 
those who heard them, we may discern in them a new 
vividness and beauty, and may also gather for ourselves 
their deeper lessons.--Thoughts From the Mount of 
Blessing, p. 1. 
2. The Cultural Background and Personal Characteristics of  
the Writers. She recognized that the differences between one 
writer and another with respect to cultural background and personal 
characteristics have a bearing on understanding what each wrote: 
The Bible points to God as its author; yet it was 
written by human hands; and in the varied style of its 
different books it presents the characteristics of the 
several writers. . . . 
Written in different ages, by men who differed 
widely in rank and occupation, and in mental and spir-
itual endowments, the books of the Bible present a wide 
contrast in style, as well as a diversity in the nature 
of the subjects unfolded. Different forms of expression 
are employed by different writers; often the same truth 
is more strikingly presented by one than by another. . .

--- Page 161 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 151 
As presented through different individuals, the 
truth is brought out in its varied aspects. One writer 
is more strongly impressed with one phase of the sub-
ject; he grasps those points that harmonize with his 
experience or with his power of perception and apprecia-
tion; another seizes upon a different phase; and each, 
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, presents what is 
most forcibly impressed upon his own mind--a different 
aspect of truth in each, but a perfect harmony through 
all.--The Great Controversy, pp. v, vi (1950 ed.). 
The Lord gave His word . . . through different 
writers, each having his own individuality, though going 
over the same history. . . . They do not represent 
things in just the same style. Each has an experience 
of his own, and this diversity broadens and deepens the 
knowledge that is brought out to meet the necessities 
of varied minds. The thoughts expressed have not a set 
uniformity. . . . 
It is seldom that two persons will view and ex-
press truth in the very same way. Each dwells on par-
ticular points which his constitution and education 
have fitted him to appreciate.--Selected Messages, 
book 1, pp. 21, 22. 
3. Word Meanings. She stresses the importance of word 
meanings and implies the need for ascertaining as accurately as 
possible the meaning of the words of Scripture in the sense 
intended by the writer: 
Human minds vary. The minds of different educa-
tion and thought receive different impressions of the 
same words, and it is difficult for one mind to give 
to one of a different temperament, education, and habits 
of thought by language exactly the same idea as that 
which is clear and distinct in his own mind. Yet to 
honest men, right-minded men, he can be so simple and 
plain as to convey his meaning for all practical 
purposes. . . . 
The Bible must be given in the language of men. 
Everything that is human is imperfect. Different mean-
ings are expressed by the same word; there is not one 
word for each distinct idea. The Bible was given for 
practical purposes. . . . 
Inspiration acts not on the man's words or his

--- Page 162 ---
152 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
expressions but on the man himself, who, under the influ-
ence of the Holy Ghost, is imbued with thoughts. But the 
words receive the impress of the individual mind.--
Selected Messages, book 1, pp. 19-21, passim. 
By earnest attention and prayerful thought he [the 
Bible student] must learn the meaning of the words of 
truth, and drink deep of the spirit of the holy oracles. 
--Christ's Object Lessons, p. 60. 
4. The Context. Ellen White implies the importance of con-
struing a passage in harmony with its context: 
In order to sustain erroneous doctrines or unchris-
tian practices, some will seize upon passages of Scrip-
ture separated from the context, perhaps quoting half of 
a single verse as proving their point, when the remain-
ing portion would show the meaning to be quite the 
opposite.--The Great Controversy, p. 521. 
[Judas] would introduce texts of Scripture that 
had no connection with the truths Christ was presenting. 
These texts, separated from their connection, perplexed 
the disciples, and increased the discouragement that 
was constantly pressing upon them.--The Desire of Ages, 
p. 719. 
5. The Analogy of Scripture. Although recognizing differ-
ences in time, historical background, literary skill, cultural 
perspective, and individual characteristics between one Bible 
writer and another, Ellen White nevertheless perceived an over-all 
unity in this diversity and affirmed that passages of Scripture 
dealing with different aspects of the same subject should be 
brought together in order to form a more complete understanding 
of the subject as a whole. She mentions also the progressive 
nature of revelation, which should be borne in mind when correla-
ting various passages of Scripture. 
The books of the Bible present a wide contrast in 
style, as well as a diversity in the nature of the sub-
jects unfolded. Different forms of expression are em-
ployed by different writers; often the same truth is 
more strikingly presented by one than by another. And 
as several writers present a subject under varied aspects 
and relations, there may appear, to the superficial, 
careless, or prejudiced reader, to be discrepancy or 
contradiction, where the thoughtful, reverent student, 
with clearer insight, discerns the underlying harmony. 
--Selected Messages, book 1, p. 25.

--- Page 163 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 153 
The truths thus revealed unite to form a perfect 
whole, adapted to meet the wants of men in all circum-
stances and experiences of life.--Ibid., p. 26. 
I saw that the Word of God, as a whole, is a perfect 
chain, one portion linking into and explaining another. 
--Early Writings, p. 221. 
Scripture must be compared with Scripture. There 
must be careful research and patient reflection.--
Review and Herald, Oct. 9, 1883, p. 2. 
The Bible is its own expositor. One passage will 
prove to be a key that will unlock other passages, and 
in this way light will be shed upon the hidden meaning 
of the word. By comparing different texts treating on 
the same subject, viewing their bearing on every side, 
the true meaning of the Scriptures will be made evident. 
--Fundamentals of Christian Education, p. 187. 
The Scriptures were given to men, not in a con-
tinuous chain of unbroken utterances, but piece by piece 
through successive generations, as God in His providence 
saw a fitting opportunity to impress man at sundry times 
and divers places. Men wrote as they were moved upon by 
the Holy Ghost. There is "first the bud, then the blos-
som, and next the fruit," "first the blade, then the ear, 
after that the full corn in the ear." This is exactly 
what the Bible utterances are to us.--Selected Messages, 
book 1, pp. 19, 20. 
The Bible is its own expositor. Scripture is to 
be compared with Scripture. The student should learn to 
view the word as a whole, and to see the relation of its 
parts.--Education, p. 190. 
6. Textual Variants. Ellen White's recognition that changes 
have been made in the text of Scripture by copyists, editors, and 
translators implies that attention should be given to an evaluation 
of the textual variants. She mentions also the importance of the 
Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. 
Some look to us gravely and say, "Don't you think 
there might have been some mistake in the copyist or in 
the translators?" This is all probable . . . [but] all 
the mistakes will not cause trouble to one soul, or 
cause any feet to stumble, that would not manufacture 
difficulties from the plainest revealed truth.--Selected 
Messages, book 1, p. 16.

--- Page 164 ---
154 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
I saw that God had especially guarded the Bible; 
yet when copies of it were few, learned men had in some 
instances changed the words, thinking that they were 
making it more plain, when in reality they were mysti-
fying that which was plain, by causing it to lean to 
their established views, which were governed by tradi-
tion.--Early Writings, pp. 220, 221. 
God had faithful witnesses, to whom He committed 
the truth, and who preserved the Word of God. The 
manuscripts of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures have 
been preserved through the ages by a miracle of God. 
--E. G. White Letter 32, 1899. 
7. Literal Meaning; Figurative Language. Ellen White insists 
on the obvious, literal meaning of a passage of Scripture unless 
the context makes evident that figurative language is being used, 
and that when such language is used the Bible is to serve as its 
own interpreter: 
The language of the Bible should be explained 
according to its obvious meaning, unless a symbol or a 
figure is employed.--The Great Controversy, p. 599. 
Others, who have an active imagination, seize 
upon the figures and symbols of Holy Writ, interpret to 
suit their fancy, with little regard to the testimony 
of Scripture as its own interpreter, and then they pre-
sent their vagaries as the teachings of God's word.--
Spirit of Prophecy, vol. 4, p. 344. 
The truths most plainly revealed in the Bible have 
been involved in doubt and darkness by learned men, who 
with a pretense of great wisdom, teach that the Scrip-
tures have a mystical, a secret, spiritual meaning not 
apparent in the language employed. These men are false 
teachers.--The Great Controversy, p. 598. 
Modes of Using Scripture 
More than 500 pages of Ellen White's books were read specifi-
cally for the purpose of evaluating her use of Scripture. Each 
quotation from or allusion to the Bible was analyzed and classi-
fied. Only an exhaustive analysis of all of her published works 
with this objective in view could provide a definitive answer to 
the question of how she used the Bible. Such a study would be 
eminently worth while. However, the following illustrations will

--- Page 165 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 155 
provide a fair sampling of the various ways in which she makes 
use of Scripture. These were arranged in twelve categories, some 
of which could be subdivided still further. In a general way the 
order is from the simple (which pose little if any exegetical prob-
lem) to the complex, some of which--especially the last--do present 
some problems. 
Category assignments were made on the basis of the import of 
the Bible passage in terms of its own context, and a similar deter-
mination was made of Ellen White's use of that particular Bible 
passage in the context in which she uses it and as to her evident 
purpose in using it. For each category one or more illustrations 
are given. Almost any two of the thirteen categories have certain 
elements in common, and often one passage cited as illustrative of 
a category might also serve to illustrate one or more other cate-
gories. In such instances assignment is more or less arbitrary 
although usually made on the basis of the most noteworthy factor 
involved. 
1. Direct Quotation, in which she narrates an event or dis-
cusses a passage of Scripture in context by quoting a portion of 
the passage: 
"And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned 
from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilder-
ness." The words of Mark are still more significant. 
He says, "Immediately the Spirit driveth Him into the 
wilderness. And He was there in the wilderness forty 
days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts." 
"And in those days He did eat nothing."--The Desire 
of Ages, p. 114. 
2. Indirect Quotation, in which she narrates an event or 
discusses a passage of Scripture in context by rephrasing it, often 
using some of the same words: 
So with Elijah, who had stood undaunted before 
King Ahab, who had faced the whole nation of Israel, 
with the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal at 
their head. After that terrible day upon Carmel, when 
the false prophets had been slain, and the people had 
declared their allegiance to God, Elijah fled for his 
life before the threats of the idolatrous Jezebel.--
Ibid., p. 120. 
3. Actual Conversation, in which she recounts a Bible inci-
dent in her own words but quotes conversation:

--- Page 166 ---
156 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Pointing to the stones which strewed the desert, 
and which had the appearance of loaves, the tempter 
said, "If Thou be the Son of God, command that these 
stones be made bread." 
Though he appears as an angel of light, these first 
words betray his character. "If Thou be the Son of God." 
--The Desire of Ages, p. 118. 
4. Hypothetical Conversation, in which she either puts words 
of Scripture from an altogether different context on the lips of 
men or supernatural beings, or creates speeches for them more or 
less in her own words: 
The high honors conferred upon Lucifer were not 
appreciated as God's special gift, and therefore called 
forth no gratitude to his Creator. . . . "Why," ques-
tioned this mighty angel, "should Christ have the 
supremacy? Why is he honored above Lucifer?"--
Patriarchs and Prophets, p. 37. 
5. Amplification, in which she augments a Bible narrative by 
providing additional factual or circumstantial information such 
as an eyewitness might give, to illuminate the narrative by making 
it more vivid and meaningful: 
The Lord directed Moses to turn aside into a rocky 
defile, and encamp beside the sea. It was revealed to 
him that Pharaoh would pursue them, but that God would 
be honored in their deliverance. 
In Egypt the report was spread that the children 
of Israel, instead of tarrying to worship in the desert, 
were pressing on toward the Red Sea. . . . Their great 
men, recovering from their fears, accounted for the 
plagues as the result of natural causes. . . . 
The king himself, attended by the great men of his 
realm, headed the attacking army. To secure the favor 
of the gods, and thus insure the success of their under-
taking, the priests also accompanied them. . . . The 
Hebrews were encamped beside the sea, whose waters pre-
sented a seemingly impassable barrier before them, 
while on the south a rugged mountain obstructed their 
further progress.--Ibid., pp. 283, 284. 
6. Insight, in which she provides factual information beyond 
that which an eyewitness could give, in order to make clear the 
significance of the event:

--- Page 167 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 157 
One of the most powerful of the angels, he says, 
has been banished from heaven. The appearance of Jesus 
indicates that He is that fallen angel, forsaken by God, 
and deserted by man.--The Desire of Ages, p. 119. 
Through the gifts of the magi from a heathen coun-
try, the Lord supplied the means for the journey into 
Egypt and the sojourn in a land of strangers.--/bid., 
p. 65. 
7. General Biblical Principles applied to a specific Bible 
situation: 
[Abraham's] conduct illustrates the inspired maxim, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."--Patriarchs 
and Prophets, p. 136. 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." 
Abraham had honored God, and the Lord honored him, taking 
him into his counsels, and revealing to him his purposes. 
--Ibid., p. 139. 
8. Homily, in which she draws lessons from a passage of 
Scripture: 
[Crossing the Red Sea] The great lesson here taught 
is for all time. Often the Christian life is beset by 
dangers, and duty seems hard to perform. The imagination 
pictures impending ruin before, and bondage or death 
behind. Yet the voice of God speaks clearly, "Go forward." 
--Ibid., p. 290. 
Heaven and earth are no wider apart today than when 
shepherds listened to the angels' song. . . . To us in 
the common walks of life, heaven may be very near. 
Angels from the courts above will attend the steps of 
those who come and go at God's command.--The Desire of 
Ages, p. 48. 
9. Borrowing words, phraseology, and thought forms of Scrip-
ture to express her own thought, without implying an attempt to 
explicate Scripture: 
God's wonderful purpose of grace, the mystery of 
redeeming love, is the theme into which "angels desire 
to look," and it will be their study throughout endless 
ages. . . . In the light from Calvary it will be seen 
that the law of self-renouncing love is the law of life

--- Page 168 ---
158 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
for earth and heaven; that the love which "seeketh not 
her own" has its source in the heart of God; and that 
in the meek and lowly One is manifested the character 
of Him who dwelleth in the light which no man can 
approach onto. 
In the beginning, God was revealed in all the 
works of creation. It was Christ that spread the 
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth. It 
was His hand that hung the worlds in space, and fash-
ioned the flowers of the field. "His strength setteth 
fast the mountains." "The sea is His, and He made it." 
Ps. 65:6; 95:5.--The Desire of Ages, p. 19, 20. 
10. Prophetic Fulfillment, in which she identifies a predic-
tive prophecy with a specific historical situation of Bible times: 
That day completed the history revealed to 
Abraham in prophetic vision centuries before: "Thy 
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, 
and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four 
hundred years; and also that nation, whom they shall 
serve, will I judge; and afterward shall they come out 
with great substance." The four hundred years had 
been fulfilled. "And it came to pass the selfsame day, 
that the Lord did bring the children of Israel out of 
the land of Egypt by their armies."--Patriarchs and 
Prophets, pp. 281, 282. 
11. Messianic Fulfillment, in which she applies an OT pas-
sage to the person and mission of Christ: 
Among the Jews there were yet steadfast souls, 
[who] strengthened their faith by dwelling upon the 
assurance given through Moses, "A Prophet shall the 
Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like 
unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever He 
shall say unto you." Acts 3:22. Again, they read how 
the Lord would anoint One "to preach good tidings unto 
the meek," "to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives," and to declare the "acceptable 
year of the Lord." Isa. 61:1, 2. They read how He 
would "set judgment in the earth," how the isles should 
"wait for His law," how the Gentiles should come to His 
light, and kings to the brightness of His rising. Isa. 
42:4; 60:3.--The Desire of Ages, p. 34. 
The quiet homes of the city of David witnessed those

--- Page 169 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 159 
scenes of horror that, six hundred years before, had 
been opened to the prophet. "In Ramah was there a 
voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourn-
ing, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be 
comforted, because they are not."--The Desire of Ages, 
p. 65. 
12. Extended Application, in which she applies a Bible state-
ment in a sense not apparent from its original context or applies 
a Bible prediction to a historical situation not clearly evident 
from the immediate context: 
"Affliction shall not rise up the second time" (Nah 1:9). In 
context, Nahum's declaration, "He will make a full end; he will not 
take vengeance twice on his foes" (Nah 1:9, RSV), specifically re-
fers to the destruction of Nineveh, which God purposed to destroy 
so thoroughly that the process would never have to be repeated. 
But Ellen White applies Nahum's prediction to the permanent anni-
hilation of all evil at the end of the age, in a universal escha-
tological sense (see The Great Controversy, p. 504). The parallel 
is perfect: the permanent destruction of Nineveh mutely witnesses 
to the fact that one day God also will permanently annihilate all 
evil. 
"The vision is yet for an appointed time" (Hab 2:3). When 
the Lord told Habakkuk to "write the vision, and make it plain," 
that it was "yet for an appointed time," and "though it tarry" to 
"wait for it," He spoke of the divine purpose, stated in chapter 1, 
that the Chaldeans were to be an instrument in God's hand to punish 
the Jews. In Prophets and Kings Ellen White comments on this pas-
sage in its historical context (pp. 386, 388), but in The Great 
Controversy she applies it to the experience of the Advent believ-
ers during the "tarrying time" between the two disappointments of 
1844 (p. 392). The patience and faith God commanded to Habakuk, 
helped the Advent people of 1844 relate to the delay in the ful-
fillment of their hopes. 
The law in Galatians. The law concerning which Paul wrote to 
the Galatians was the Jewish religious system ordained at Sinai as 
the way of salvation in OT times. But, says the apostle, salvation 
is now by faith and not by "the works of the law" (Gal 3:2), that 
is, the ritual requirements prescribed by the law of Moses. When 
Ellen White deals with Paul's message to the Galatians historically 
she comments on the law in its original context. But in applying 
the epistle homiletically to our day she defines the law as "both 
the ceremonial and the moral code of ten commandments" and adds

--- Page 170 ---
160 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
that--to us--"the Holy Spirit through the apostle is speaking 
especially of the moral law." Her comment in The Acts of the 
Apostles is accurate exegesis--an exposition of what the apostle 
intended to say (pp. 383-388)--whereas that in Selected Messages, 
book 1, is an inspired homily on how God would have us apply the 
same principle in our day (pp. 233-235). The Galatians were not 
to seek salvation through mechanical observance of the ceremonial 
law; we are not to seek salvation through mechanical observance 
of the moral law--or any other law, for that matter. 
Ellen White's application of a passage of Scripture in a 
sense not apparent from its original context is comparable to the 
practice of NT writers in applying OT passages in a sense not 
always apparent from the OT context: 
Abraham's "seed." In its OT context the "seed" (Gn 22:18) 
promised Abraham referred to Isaac primarily and by projection to 
all of Abraham's posterity. But Paul specifically excludes Isaac 
and restricts the prediction to Christ, who was the "seed" promised 
to Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden (see Gal 3:16). 
"A virgin shall conceive" (Is 7:14). Contextually, Isaiah's 
"young woman" (Is 7:14, RSV) might have been either his wife or 
some member of the royal family. In the LXX and in Matthew the 
term young woman is rendered "virgin" (Mt 1:23), and Matthew 
applies the passage to Mary (vs. 18). Authority for the Messianic 
import of the statement rests on him as an inspired writer coming 
later than Isaiah, rather than on Isaiah. 
"Out of Egypt . . . my son" (Mt 2:15). In Hosea the "son" 
God brought forth from Egypt is a figure of speech for the Hebrew 
people at the time of the Exodus, but Matthew uses the statement 
as a prediction of Jesus' return from Egypt. Christ was God's 
Son in a personal sense as Israel was in a corporate metaphorical 
sense. Matthew rather than Hosea is the authority for this appli-
cation. 
Oxen threshing out grain. Moses' command not to muzzle oxen 
threshing out grain had to do with literal oxen on Palestinian 
threshing floors (Dt 25:4). But Paul twice indicates that the 
instruction given to Moses by God had a concern beyond the literal 
oxen. Paul applies the command to the support of the gospel min-
istry and declares that God had this in mind when He spoke to 
Moses about the oxen (1 Cor 9:9, 10; 1 Ti 5:18). The principle 
is the same, but it is given a parallel and extended application. 
Paul, however, should be recognized as the inspired authority for 
the application made of Moses' inspired words.

--- Page 171 ---
Ellen G. White's Use of the Bible 	 161 
As these illustrations indicate, NT writers often quote from 
or allude to OT passages, amplifying their import beyond what is 
readily apparent from the statement in its original context. Both 
are authentic authoritative statements of truth inspired by the 
Holy Spirit. 
Conclusion 
Ellen White was God's appointed messenger to the church in 
our day--even as the prophets of old represented Him to the cove-
nant people in the long ago. Her role was to convey a message 
from God appropriate for our time. She considered it her task to 
direct men and women to the Bible as the inspired, authoritative 
Word of God, to apply its principles to the problems the church 
and its members encounter in the world today, and to guide them 
in their preparation for Christ's return. 
In her writings Ellen White constantly refers to and quotes 
from the Bible in a wide variety of ways. As the preceding illus-
trations indicate, she often does so in context to illuminate a 
passage of Scripture in its historical setting, and often homileti-
cally to apply a Bible principle to a modern situation. 
Perhaps the most noteworthy impressions resulting from this 
relatively preliminary sampling are: (1) The extent to which 
Ellen White's own thinking and expression were bound up with the 
Bible, and (2) the great variety of ways in which she uses the 
Bible. 
Rightly understood Ellen White's use of the Bible comports 
with sound, recognized principles of interpretation, which she sets 
forth at length. We may assume that she purposed to follow the 
principles she commended to others. When her voluminous use of 
the Bible is taken into consideration, her literary faithfulness 
to it is remarkable.

--- Page 172 ---
Dr. Gerhard F. Hasel, from Germany, is 
associate professor of Old Testament 
and biblical theology at the Seventh-
day Adventist Theological Seminary, 
where he joined the faculty in 1967. 
He served as a pastor in New England 
and taught previously in Tennessee. 
In his doctoral studies, completed at 
Vanderbilt University in 1970, he pre-
sented the dissertation: "The Origin 
and Early History of the Remnant Motif 
in Ancient Israel."

--- Page 173 ---
PART 	 IV 
PRINCIPLES OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION 
10. General Principles of Interpretation 
GERHARD F. HASEL 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
Biblical interpretation is both a science and an art based 
on a clearly defined methodology that works with a set of princi-
ples primarily derived from and adequate to the Bible as the in-
spired Word of God. 
The knowledge that the Bible is in need of interpretation is 
as old as the Bible itself. The issue of interpretation comes 
through in the question of Philip, who spoke to the eunuch read-
ing in the book of Isaiah: "Understandest thou what thou readest?" 
and the answer was definite: "How can I, except some man should 
guide me?" (Acts 8:30, 31). 
The need for interpretation rests in the fact that the Bible 
was written in a different culture, separated from our time by 
the distance of many ages, and that it arose under certain specific 
situations. The fact that the Bible was written in languages 
other than our own calls for translation, and the variety of ver-
sions (translations) compounds the need of interpretation. Inter-
pretation is necessary on the one hand in order to discover the 
original meaning of the Bible writers and on the other hand to 
understand the Bible's relevance for our time. The major discus-
sion of this chapter dealing with general principles of biblical 
interpretation finds its basis in the foundations of biblical 
interpretation.

--- Page 174 ---
164 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
A. Foundations of Biblical Interpretation 
I. The Uniqueness of the Bible and Interpretation  
1. A Divine Author and Human Writers  
At the heart of Christian faith is the certainty that God 
Himself has spoken in Scripture. Thus the Bible contains the 
divine revelation of God's will and purpose in words and deeds 
recorded in human language over a period of some 1,500 years. As 
inspired revelation the Bible has God as its Author. This divine 
origin is attested by the testimony that "no prophecy ever came 
by the impulse of man, but men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke 
from God" (2 Pe 1:21, RSV). Paul has written that "all scripture 
is inspired by God" (2 Ti 3:16, RSV). The divine origin of the 
Bible is the most basic fact and fundamental reality of Christian 
faith. 
God has chosen to unfold truths about Himself in human lan-
guage despite its dimensions and limitations in order to speak to 
us. This twofold origin with its divine and human dimensions 
requires of the interpreter of the Bible that he develop and employ 
sound and adequate principles of interpretation based on this two-
fold origin of Scripture. 
The self-revelation of God as embodied in Scripture possesses 
an authority superior to any other source of knowing God. This 
fact has definite implications regarding biblical interpretation. 
The nature of biblical inspiration and scriptural authority demands 
that the Bible be regarded as the "unerring standard" (MH, 462) by 
which human ideas--whether in the realms of philosophy, science, 
or tradition--are tested. Although it is true that modern criti-
cal study of the Bible could not have arisen without the radical 
break of the Reformers from medieval principles of interpretation, 
it is equally true that the methods of modern critical interpreta-
tion of Scripture have come into existence in the age of rational-
ism, and thus have broken away from the Protestant principle of 
sola scriptura. By the end of the 18th century the rational-
critical study of the Bible was fully developed, and it led to 
full-fledged historical criticism under philosophical presupposi-
tions that in one way or another determined and determine to this 
day the methodologies of critical investigations of the Scriptures. 
Modern rational-critical study of the Bible employs admittedly 
external keys that deny in principle the self-interpretation of 
Scripture, and thus undermine the authority of the Bible. Proper 
recognition of the uniqueness of the Bible with its divine author-
ship and human writers demands that it not be interpreted by ex-
ternal means such as tradition, philosophy, science, and the like

--- Page 175 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 165 
but be allowed to function as its own interpreter. 
2. The Christian Canon as the Context for Biblical  
Interpretation  
God's providence provided the 
biblical books and their selection 
period of time. Hence, the number 
is; no more and no less. Although 
of development of biblical canon is important in itself, in the 
final analysis the authoritative bodies that had a part in the 
formation of the biblical canon did not provide the Bible with its 
authority. The Bible is self-authenticating. It was the content 
and message of the inspired writings functioning authoritatively 
within the communities of believers that determined the acceptance 
of those writings in the biblical canon. In tying their faith to 
an authoritative body of Scripture, the communities of believers 
sought to establish the truth of their faith in terms of its his-
torical and theological continuity with that of the prophets and 
the apostles. 
The affirmation of the canon as the proper context for inter-
preting the Bible implies that Christian faith is tied to a par-
ticular historical witness or set of writings adjudged to contain 
the "rule of faith" (regula fidei) for the life of the community 
of faith. In the formation of the canon the community of faith 
acknowledged that God continues to make known His will and purpose 
to His church through the medium of Scripture, which is not merely 
a memorial of the past but also the bearer of life for the present 
and the future. Implicit in the use of the canon as a context for 
interpreting the Bible is rejection of the method that would im-
prison the Bible within a strict context of the historical past. 
Appeal to the scriptural canon is based on the position that the 
Bible is a vehicle of divine reality, which indeed encountered an 
ancient people in the historical past but continues to confront 
the church and men through its pages. 
Recognition of the canon of Scripture as the context for 
interpretation of the Bible has extraordinary hermeneutical impli-
cations. It is to be acknowledged that today man no longer stands 
in basic harmony with biblical faith, and thus he conducts his 
investigation from a universe constructed outside the realities 
of faith. A major break from early Protestant interpretation of 
the Bible came through the development of the historical-critical 
method, beginning with the age of enlightenment. This change has 
brought about a relatively new relation of man to the Bible. 
The historical-critical method works on three basic principles: 
origin of the sixty-six 
and preservation over a long 
of OT and NT books is what it 
the historical investigation

--- Page 176 ---
166 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
(1) Correlation, (2) analogy, and (3) criticism (E. Troeltsch). 
On the basis of the principle of correlation it is argued that no 
event or text can be understood unless it is seen in its historical 
context. This means that no critical investigator can make use 
of supernatural intervention as a principle of historical explana-
tion, because this approach shatters the continuity of natural 
events as to cause and effect. Thus the historical-critical method 
understands history as an unbroken series of causes and effects in 
which there is no room for God's activity. Accordingly, historical 
events must be explained by earlier historical causes and under-
stood in terms of other historical experiences. On the other hand, 
the Bible's claim of God's supernatural intervention in history 
involves depths of historical experience and reality that the 
historical-critical interpreter is unable to fathom (G. von Rad). 
The second basic principle of the historical-critical method 
is the principle of analogy, or the claim that the present and the 
past are analogous. It is asserted that there must be similarity 
or there cannot be dissimilarity. If the principle of analogy is 
employed in this rigorous sense, Christian faith is confronted 
with a serious problem, because there is no room in this setting 
for the uniqueness of Jesus Christ's virgin birth, death on the 
cross, and resurrection. 
The principle of analogy cannot be accepted in an uncritical 
manner, first because the historian has to construct his analogies 
on his knowledge of the present, and it is not to be assumed that 
the present is known completely by any individual. Furthermore, 
man's total present experience as to varieties of cultures and 
societies is complex. In addition, the presupposition that the 
past has to conform to the present is to be denied (R. G. Colling-
wood). It is well known that the ancient Greeks and the Romans 
controlled the size of their populations by exposing newborn 
infants. This fact has no analogy to our present experience, but 
it must not thus be rendered doubtful. A sound hermeneutic cannot 
be bound by the principle of analogy, because there is evidence 
not only for similarity but also for dissimilarity. 
The third principle of the historical-critical method is the 
principle of criticism, according to which any historical assertion 
is only a statement of probability. According to some philosophers 
of history one is to apply the principle of criticism psychologi-
cally according to the varying mental states of the document's 
author. It determines (a) what he meant, (b) whether he believed 
what he said, (c) whether his belief was justified. Inasmuch as 
any statement of probability is subject to revision, one cannot, 
for example, avoid skepticism concerning many events described in 
the Gospels.

--- Page 177 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 167 
The lengthy and heated discussion as to whether the resur-
rection was an actual event illustrates the problem the historical-
critical method raises. Many present-day theologians claim that 
the resurrection of Jesus is a "non-historical" happening. Some 
(K. Barth, W. Pannenberg, W. Kanneth, A. von Campenhausen), how-
ever, insist on the historicity of the resurrection. 
The careful interpreter recognizes that a consistently 
applied historical-critical method cannot do justice to the Bible 
claim to truth. The transcendent, or divine, dimension of the 
Bible as the Word of God cannot be adequately dealt with by the 
historical-critical method. If it were true that all historical 
events by definition must be explained on the basis of cause and 
effect on the physical level, there would be no room for God to 
act in history, because God is not a historical individual for 
whom there is an analogy. A methodology that rules out a priori 
the divine action in history through word and deed is unable to 
deal adequately and properly with the manifest testimony of the 
Bible. Because the reality expressed in the biblical texts testi-
fies to a divine dimension, which goes beyond the self-imposed 
limitations of the historical-critical method, there must be 
employed a hermeneutic adequate for the Bible to account for both 
the divine and human dimensions. 
II. The Self-interpretation of Scripture  
1. The Scripture Principle  
The classical understanding for the self-interpretation of 
Scripture is the famous Protestant principle of sola scriptura--
"the Bible only"--often referred to as the Scripture principle. 
The Scripture principle--the formal affirmation of the position 
that the Bible is its own interpreter--is based on its divine-
human origin. It involves the supreme authority of the infallible 
Holy Scriptures to the exclusion of all human authority in matters 
of doctrine and salvation. It is based on the Bible's inspiration, 
unity, canonicity, and supreme authority. 
Jesus illustrated this principle when, beginning with the 
writings of Moses and continuing through the remaining writings, 
He "explained to them the things concerning Himself in all the 
Scriptures" (Lk 24:27, NASB). Adventist interpreters of the 
Bible generally have accepted this principle and maintained that 
the Bible only is our infallible rule of faith, doctrine, reform, 
and practice. 
Proper understanding of the solo scriptura principle - -that is,

--- Page 178 ---
168 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the Scripture principle--militates against the well-known herme-
neutic whereby the Bible is interpreted by the intelligence of the 
individual at his own discretion. The Bible may not be subjected 
to private interpretation, nor may it be interpreted under the 
domination of an external ploy such as philosophy, science, or 
tradition. 
An additional aspect of the Scripture principle requires that 
a difficult passage of the Bible be interpreted by a clear passage 
or clear passages. Obviously, this procedure must not be followed 
indiscriminately. It would be a mistake to bring just any passage 
to bear on any other passage. In the process of comparing text 
with text, scripture with scripture, one needs to let one text on 
a given subject interpret another text on the same subject (see 
FE, 187). By viewing the bearing of passages or texts on the same 
subject on every side, the interpreter of the Bible is expected to 
arrive at the true meaning of the text (see Ev, 581; GC, 521). A 
distortion of this principle would be to take the opposite route, 
namely, to interpret a clear passage with an obscure or difficult 
one. 
2. The Bible its own Interpreter  
The principle of self-interpretation of Scripture rests not 
only on the Scripture principle but also on the principle that 
Scripture is its own interpreter. The Reformation principle of 
Scripture its own interpreter is endorsed by Seventh-day Adventists 
(see Ed, 190; GC, 521; etc.). The consistent admonition, Make 
the Bible its own expositor (see GC, 511), comes in full recogni-
tion of the principle of the Bible as its own interpreter. This 
principle implies that one portion of Scripture interprets another. 
As one passage of Scripture on a given subject is the key to 
another passage on the same subject, so the OT interprets the NT 
and the NT the OT. 
The most adequate context of the interpretation of various 
sections, passages, or texts of Scripture is the whole Bible 
according to the analogy of faith. God as the Author of both 
testaments saw the end from the beginning; He foresaw the future 
in a way the human author did not, and thus He had cognizance of 
this future in inspiring the human writers to write the documents 
that are recognized as Scripture. Although God spoke to the gen-
erations contemporary to the writers of the biblical books, He 
saw to it also that the reader of these books in the future would 
find therein depth of meaning and relevance beyond the local and 
limited circumstances in which and for which the original was 
produced. The prophets are not to be understood merely as

--- Page 179 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 169 
spokesmen of God for their own times (with a divinely given fore-
knowledge of God's plan of salvation for the immediate future) 
but also they must be understood to have predicted events in the 
distant future (see 1 Pe 1:10-12). 
It is evident that the Bible contains a fuller import and 
deeper meaning than is on the surface. For example, the prophet 
Isaiah emphasizes a connection between the Exodus from Egypt and 
the return from captivity. Such parallelism is based on the 
understanding that God's actions on behalf of His people follow a 
pattern of fidelity in which the Lord shows Himself the same yes-
terday, today, and forever (Heb 13:8). What is expressed here is 
that behind each verse of the Bible there stands not only the mind 
of the man who contributed to its writing but in a special way the 
mind of God who thus intended to communicate truth for all peoples 
and all times. 
In letting the Bible be its own interpreter, the person 
engaged in biblical interpretation is compelled to attempt to the 
best of his ability bringing together all that is said about a 
particular subject from different times and varied circumstances 
as revealed in Scripture. Also although it is strongly insisted 
that the various passages on the same subject be compared and 
studied together, the fullest meaning of Scripture will not be 
made evident unless the respective passages from the same and 
other biblical writers of various times and circumstances are 
brought together. This procedure is justified on the basis of 
recognition of the divine dimension of Scripture as the inspired 
Word of God. Properly applied, it does not do injustice to the 
varied aspects of the subject as brought out by the several 
inspired writers. 
3. Objectivity and Interpretation 
Anyone who engages in biblical interpretation has willingly 
or unwillingly a certain preunderstanding. It is a well-known 
truism that absolute objectivity is not available. It is equally 
true that one cannot apply the so-called empty-head principle, 
whereby it is supposed that one can drop all preconceived notions 
and opinions, come to the text from a completely neutral ground, 
and engage in biblical interpretation. Although this procedure 
may sound reasonable it is hardly dependable because if an inter-
preter of the Bible knows the biblical languages, for example, he 
obviously must have learned the meaning of words and gained an 
understanding of grammar that generations of scholars have helped 
to determine. And he comes to the text with this "full head" to 
find to the best of his ability the meaning God has in the text.

--- Page 180 ---
170 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
It is a mandate that the interpreter seek to be objective. 
He must attempt to silence his subjectivity as much as possible if 
he is to obtain objective knowledge. The more he is aware of his 
own preunderstanding and presuppositions the more he is in a posi-
tion to control them. These requirements make good sense insofar 
as they are taken to mean that the interpreter has to silence his 
personal wishes with regard to the outcome of the interpretation. 
The interpreter of the Bible must remember that he is deal-
ing with "living oracles" (Acts 7:38) of God, which fact imposes 
on him the requirement to possess religious insight and sympathy 
for the biblical text. It must be constantly recognized that it 
is God Himself who through the Bible and the Holy Spirit creates 
in the interpreter the necessary presuppositions and the essential 
perspective for understanding Scripture. The more comprehensive 
the interpreter's experience spiritually and otherwise; the deeper 
and fuller the development of his understanding; the more detailed 
his knowledge of the milieu, the time, and the background of the 
work he is to interpret, the better balanced will be his judgment 
and the greater will be the likelihood that he will discover pre-
cisely what the text means. 
III. The Goal of Biblical Interpretation 
On the basis of the foundations of biblical interpretation 
outlined above, i.e., the nature of the Bible, its uniqueness, 
authority, and unity, with its hermeneutical corollaries of "the 
Bible only" and "Scripture its own interpreter" we formulate the 
objective of biblical interpretation as follows: 
Proper and adequate biblical interpretation seeks (1) to 
determine what the inspired biblical writer as God's chosen instru-
ment understood himself and meant to communicate to hearers and/or 
readers; (2) to comprehend and expound the fuller import and 
deeper meaning intended or implicit in the words of the prophet, 
whether or not he himself was aware of it; and (3) to translate 
and transmit these aspects to modern men, making them relevant to 
the historical situation of our times. 
B. General Principles of Interpretation 
I. The Original Text of Scripture 
It is a well-known fact that although no autographs of any 
book of the Bible are preserved, the text of the Bible has been 
preserved in thousands of manuscripts. The NT alone is known in

--- Page 181 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 171 
whole or in part in about 5,500 manuscripts. No other ancient doc-
ument has been preserved in more manuscripts than has the Bible. 
Knowledge of the procedures and methods of textual studies 
is needed for recovery of the original text or closest approxima-
tion of the various books of the Bible. The following three steps 
are essential: (1) Collection and arrangement of readings in the 
preserved manuscripts, (2) Examination of the various readings, 
and (3) Determination of the correct or most likely reading. A 
full and proper use of the text can best proceed on constant 
reexamination of the readings in manuscript form, which involves 
comprehensive understanding of the history of the text and the 
rules for deciding questions of textual criticism. 
II. The Matter of Translation 
The fact that God has chosen to let His divine thought become 
incarnate in human languages other than our own calls for transla-
tions. The Bible is written in three different languages--Hebrew, 
Aramaic, and Greek. It must be recognized that these languages 
have to be understood and analyzed in the same manner as any other 
ancient tongues. The inspired writers using the languages of 
their day employed terms that had particular meaning in the his-
torical context in which the writers lived. These words were 
employed to communicate divine thoughts to men. 
The main object of the work of translation is to achieve a 
new presentation of the original message. The translator must 
strive for equivalents rather than literal identity. He must seek 
to reproduce as accurately as possible the original meaning in the 
language of the here and now. Because most of the readers of this 
book will not engage in translation practices, it is not necessary 
to dwell on this subject longer except to say that it must not be 
expected that any single translation will be perfect. Various 
good translations complement each other because no translation can 
capture every nuance of the semantic emphasis of the original. 
III. Understanding Words  
1. Literal Meanings  
It is natural to expect that the person engaged in seeking 
to understand Scripture begins with the smallest entity of communi-
cation, namely, words. It can hardly be emphasized enough, how-
ever, that words do not come isolated. Words are joined to other 
words to make up phrases and sentences. Sentences are joined to

--- Page 182 ---
172 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
make paragraphs, units, and chapters to form the individual scrip-
tural books which together compose the Bible. According to the 
hermeneutic circle we cannot grasp the meaning of a word unless 
we look at the word in its grammatical and syntactical setting in 
the sentence. This is to say that the word is receiving its par-
ticular contextual meaning and makes its contextual contribution 
within the sentence. On the basis of linguistic semantics it is 
recognized that each sentence with its surrounding context is the 
setting that determines the meaning of the particular word or 
term, just as each word or term in a sentence defines by its con-
tent, grammar, and syntactical structure the meaning of the clause 
or sentence of which it is a part. This means that a particular 
term, despite its etymology, can mean different things in differ-
ent contexts or sentences. We can also put it this way: Whatever 
a particular term may mean cannot be arrived at exclusively on the 
etymology of the term, but only from the connection or context of 
the sentence in which it is used and the mutual relationship of 
word to sentence and sentence to word. 
From the vantage point of modern semantics it is inadmissible 
to overlook contextual meaning of a word in the phrase, sentence, 
or paragraph in which it is used. On the one hand, it serves as 
a much needed corrective against the tendency to read root meaning 
into all contexts, which makes it impossible to recognize that a 
biblical writer may have used the term with his own connotation 
and semantic emphasis. This is what has been called root fallacy 
and etymologizing (James Barr, The Semantics of Biblical Language 
[London, 1961]). 
On the other hand, according to the hermeneutical circle one 
can grasp the whole only through the single parts, as the indi-
vidual parts contribute to the whole. This implies a self-correct-
ing process of understanding that spirals into the meaning of the 
whole by letting each new part fill out, qualify, and amplify the 
understanding reached in reading the earlier individual parts. 
At times scholars have placed great emphasis on the "etymo-
logical" meaning of a word. Etymology is concerned with the 
origin and derivation of words from previous forms. In other 
words, it is a historical investigation of the history of a term 
during its usage in a language, or even from prior forms in other 
languages. 
On the basis of new understanding it must be recognized that 
the history of a word and its etymological origin is no infal-
lible guide to the meaning of the word in a given context. This 
fact is illustrated by the hundreds of words in the King James 
Version that have changed their meaning radically and in today's

--- Page 183 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 173 
usage have completely different semantic ranges. These considera-
tions lead us to the formulation of the following principle: The 
proper determinant for the meaning of a word is the immediate 
context in its clause or sentence. This contextual priority has 
a determining function for the meaning of this word, no matter 
what its root meaning or etymology may be. A sound principle of 
interpretation is to avoid superimposing etymology and root mean-
ing on a word regardless of its usage in a particular context. An 
important aid in the study of the meaning of a word is to see its 
relation to metonyms, synonyms, and antonyms. 
It is not infrequent that a particular word in the Bible is 
used rarely. In these cases it is difficult to determine the 
meaning of the respective word. Lexicographers have therefore 
resorted--and rightly so--to the study of this particular word 
and related terms in cognate languages of available nonbiblical 
literature. Although these methods and procedures have proved 
helpful, they are by no means without serious problems. For 
example, if a particular Greek word is used only once in the NT, 
how do we find its respective meaning? It was customary in the 
past to turn to Greek literature to determine its meaning. In a 
good number of instances such words are used or found only in 
classical Greek, separated from the Greek used in the NT by sev-
eral centuries. But does it follow that the meaning of a word in 
classical Greek is the same as the meaning of the word centuries 
later? Is the use of a word by Plato necessarily the same as its 
use by a NT writer? It is obvious that great caution must be 
exercised in the study of such terms. 
We must also emphasize the influence the language of the OT 
(both the Hebrew and the Septuagint Greek) had on the creativity 
of the NT writers. For the reason that Christian belief and prac-
tice was not identical to Jewish or Hellenistic background, a 
"new content" was expressed by the same words, sentences, and 
complexes used by NT writers. This means that the "new content" 
given to NT words may have been foreign to the Hellenistic back-
ground and ethos. Still the "new content" was expressed in words 
and sentences used in the Greek language, which means that a dif-
ferent semantic function and value was given to the Greek word or 
words. This "new content" can be recovered only by analysis of 
the basic unit of communication--the sentence. This recognition 
leads to methodological necessity to study with great diligence 
the multilayered cultural and religious situation of a Greek word 
in extrabiblical literature so as to avoid reading a content from 
one situation and usage into another situation and usage. 
Individual words must not be torn out of their religio-
cultural moorings and treated in isolation from the total context

--- Page 184 ---
174 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
in which they are found. To treat them in isolation of theologi-
cal context and phenomenological conception is to run the danger 
of reading elements of one culture and religion into the terms of 
another, with inevitable distortion. This would mean that we could 
read a pagan notion into a biblical idea. With these methodologi-
cal precautions, we are able to venture into studying the back-
ground of words used by biblical writers without opening ourselves 
up to misrepresenting and misinterpreting biblical thoughts. It 
must be constantly recognized that the biblical writers expressed 
a "new content" in words whose usage can be determined only on 
the basis of the context in which they are found in Scripture. 
Therefore, the following principle of interpretation seems sound: 
The careful student of Scripture studies the similarities and 
differences of identical words in the extrabiblical and biblical 
languages but seeks to avoid reading the content of extrabiblical 
religion and culture into the biblical usage, because he is aware 
that the biblical context may indicate a "new content" for these 
respective words as used in Scripture. 
What we have stated so far applies not only to the NT but also 
to the OT. In the case of the OT the situation is even more com-
plicated than of the NT, because the OT is written in Semitic 
languages, which differ in their structures and norms from the 
Indo-European languages to which Greek belongs. 
To this problem is added another one, namely, that we have 
relatively few extrabiblical texts in the Hebrew language from 
OT times. It is for this reason that scholars have been relying 
heavily on cognate Semitic languages in determining the meaning 
of words in the Hebrew OT. From the last century onward, millennia 
of human history have been recovered in the life of entire civili-
zations restored to view. When the spade of the archaeologist 
uncovered important cuneiform archives of the Assyrians, Sumerians, 
and Hittites, the brilliant discoveries at Ugarit, and the archives 
from Mari, ancient civilizations were resurrected. In the last 
century the Egyptian hieroglyphs and Mesopotamian cuneiform were 
deciphered, and in this century the languages of the Hittites, 
Canaanites, Hurrians, and others were added. The resurrection of 
Egyptian, Mesopotamian, and Anatolian civilizations has thrown an 
unusual amount of light on the cultural and religious background 
of the OT. The recovery of all this background material has 
brought with it a revolution in the understanding and evaluation 
of the OT. 
In many respects these phenomenal finds from the ancient 
world have overthrown well-established critical theories. The 
views of Wellhausen, which dominated the scene of biblical inter-
pretation at the turn of the century, no longer are held in their

--- Page 185 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 175 
classical form. The implications of many facts indicate that the 
Pentateuch--five books of Moses--as a whole could have originated 
in the second millennium B.C., that Samuel actually could have 
issued the warnings recorded in 1 Sa 8, and that the first few 
chapters of Proverbs (1-7) are something more than what a late 
scribe could do. It is therefore obvious that the importance of 
the archaeological finds can hardly be overestimated, and it is 
equally obvious that the collateral evidence available today makes 
the OT more intelligible. 
It certainly is correct that the world of the OT is that of 
the ancient Near East, whose geography, history, and culture have 
been recovered by archaeology in a most unusual fashion. Humanly 
speaking, the OT is a part of this world of the ancient Near East, 
with its literature, history, and culture. Therefore, the history, 
literature, and culture of the ancient Near East does have a bear-
ing on related aspects in the OT. Likewise the OT shares, at 
least to a certain degree, in the context in both space and time 
of the related ancient Near Eastern materials. However, if con-
ceived correctly, the OT is not on a par with the extrabiblical 
materials that have been recovered from the same historical era. 
Inasmuch as the OT is inspired Scripture it has a share in the 
unique biblical context, and whereas it uses words that can be 
found in extrabiblical cognate materials, there still is the "new 
content" that the OT authors thought to express. 
This may be illustrated by means of a word found in Gn 1:2. 
To the present day there are interpreters who suppose that there 
is a direct relationship between the word tn'am, "deep" (Gn 1:2), 
and the term Tiamat, the female monster of the Babylonian national 
epic Enuma elish. On this basis some scholars maintain that tnam 
in the biblical creation account contains "an echo of the old cos-
mogonic myth." This means that the description of creation in 
Gn 1:2 is read in terms of the so-called Babylonian creation epic. 
On the basis of comparative Semitics as known today it no 
longer can be maintained that the Hebrew word tehom derives from 
the Babylonian term Tiamat. The implications of these new insights 
are crucial for an understanding of the usage of the term tehom 
in Gn 1:2. The word tnam does not suggest that there is a latent 
conflict between a monster of the abyss and the Creator, if inter-
preted in terms of its own context. In this biblical verse tehom 
is nothing but a passive, powerless, and inanimate element in God's 
creation. To interpret the word tehom in Gn 1:2 in terms of a 
cognate word in Babylonian mythology means to read into the thought 
content of the Hebrew term a notion that is alien to it. 
This example emphasizes again that whereas the cognate Semitic

--- Page 186 ---
176 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
languages prove extremely useful in bringing about more complete 
insights of Hebrew words, sound hermeneutical methodology requires 
that religio-historical parallels be considered against the total 
phenomenological conception of the literature in which such 
parallels appear (cf. C. Westermann, ThLZ, 40 [1965], 489-496). 
With due recognition of the limitations indicated, the care-
ful interpreter of the Bible can with profit carry on comparative 
studies by recognizing the similarities and differences between 
the terminology, religion, culture, and social patterns of bibli-
cal writers and those of their neighbors. The interpreter will 
always be most sensitive to the "new content" of words, which is 
predicated on biblical faith and reality. On the basis of these 
principles of interpretation one can recognize more clearly where 
the inspired writers have forcefully rejected what they felt 
irreconcilable with their faith and understanding of reality and 
the revelation that came to them supernaturally. To take seri-
ously the meaning and limitations of parallel phenomena is to 
shield one's self against reading elements of one religio-cultural 
setting in terms of another. Inasmuch as the method of comparative 
philology is still not refined to a degree that makes its conclu-
sions sure beyond the shadow of a doubt, one must apply the princi-
ple that terms for words of the biblical languages can be enlight-
ened by cognate languages only when the recovered meaning is in 
harmony with the immediate linguistic context in the Bible and 
the context of the biblical message as a whole. The application 
of this principle makes it possible to avoid reading elements of 
one cultural setting into another. 
2. Nonliteral Meanings  
The basic principle of biblical interpretation is to take 
words always in their literal sense unless there is an unmistakable 
contextual indication to the contrary. Words in biblical languages 
as well as in all the other languages certainly have meanings 
assigned to them that are very different from a primary literal 
one. For the sake of convenience such meanings may be called 
nonliteral meanings. 
Idiomatic expressions or idioms, which are a semantic unit 
of their own, have a meaning that is more than the sum of their 
individual parts. For example, the idiom "horn of salvation" 
(see 2 Sa 22:3; Ps 18:2; Lk 1:69) means "great Saviour." 
Metaphors and similes are figures of speech that express 
with their words figurative or nonliteral meanings. The same is 
true of the figure of speech of personification, which is used

--- Page 187 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 177 
both in the OT and in the NT. The Bible also knows hyperbole 
(see Dt 1:28; Jn 1:25). 
Without attempting to be exhaustive in our delineation of nonlit-
eral meanings, we also may refer to symbols, which belong to the 
class of terms or category of words with figurative or nonliteral 
meanings. The symbol of the pillar of cloud was indicative of 
divine guidance (see Ex 13:21) and glory (see Ex 16:10). Examples 
of other objective symbols could be multiplied. 
In interpreting symbols the guiding principle is to let the 
Holy Spirit, who provided the symbol, be also the guide in identi-
fying the symbol. With regard to symbols the interpreter must 
exercise care so as not to fall into the trap of allegorical 
interpretation, where the Holy Spirit does not explicitly provide 
guidance. A sound principle for the interpretation of words with 
figurative or nonliteral meanings is to avoid interpreting figures 
of speech beyond the meaning they seek to communicate. 
A basic principle of interpretation with regard to words is 
to investigate the same word or term in its usage in the same 
book, by the same author, and then beyond in the remaining writers 
of the Bible. As this is done the interpreter takes into account 
the various immediate contexts of the word and its sentence combi-
nation. He is constantly aware of the purposes and developments 
of thought in a particular writer and among the various inspired 
Bible writers. 
IV. Understanding Sentences 
We have already affirmed that the individual word is properly 
understood within the sentence and the sentence by means of its 
words. This reciprocal relationship we have referred to as the 
hermeneutical circle (spiraling out from word to entire Bible), 
which is a structural law of understanding. There is mutual de-
pendence of the general knowledge on the particular knowledge and 
the particular knowledge on the general knowledge. This means, 
again, that the individual word, sentence, unit, book, and bibli-
cal author can be understood properly only within the hermeneutical 
circle of the entire witness of the scriptural canon and vice versa. 
This is the fundamental structure of hermeneutical methodology 
adequate to Scripture as the Word of God, with its divine and 
human dimensions. 
In the interpretation of the biblical writings the hermeneuti-
cal circle takes on specific emphasis: The understanding of the 
sentence, unit, chapter, author, or whatever form is possible only

--- Page 188 ---
178 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
on the basis of a preunderstanding of the biblical witnesses in 
their totality, their origin, and their kerygmatic intention. 
Contrariwise, the total understanding of the biblical witnesses 
is constantly corrected, enlarged, and amplified by means of the 
interpretation of the single part. 
The exegete in interpreting the sentence will use the most 
up-to-date knowledge available to him in grammatical, syntactical, 
stylistic, etc., analysis. An understanding of the grammar in-
volves a knowledge as to whether the original language is analytic 
or agglutinative, i.e., whether the language basically stresses 
word order or the meaning is understood only partially by word 
order and much more by word endings or case endings. An under-
standing of inflection, declination, conjugation, and other forms 
is basic. 
Grammatical understanding usually is more easily perceived 
than syntax understanding is. Syntax considers the relationship 
of words to one another. Hebrew and Aramaic, much as in the case 
of the English language, lost their case endings at an early period, 
and so depend largely on position for syntactical function. The 
significance of word order in Hebrew and Aramaic has not been fully 
appreciated. 
In syntax, attention must be given to the syntax of the noun, 
with its relationship of number, gender, and case. The syntax of 
the verb pays attention to the tense or aspect, the voice, the 
theme or stem, and so on. Equal attention must be given to the 
syntax of prepositions, adjectives, numerals, pronouns, articles, 
and particles. Finally, one must speak of the syntax of clauses. 
An understanding of the syntax of the Greek of the NT must be 
seen in relationship to the syntax of classical Greek and to that 
of the Septuagint, the Apostolic Fathers, the papyri and inscrip-
tions, and modern Greek. 
Outstanding among the recent contributions that ancient 
Semitic languages have made to a better understanding of the He-
brew language has been that of Ugaritic in the rediscovery of gram-
matical forms and syntactical usages of biblical Hebrew, which had 
gone unrecognized and so had given rise to textual difficulties. 
For example, the isolation of a particle consisting of the letter 
m plus a vowel (-i or -a) in Ugaritic as a stylistic device has 
led to its rediscovery in biblical Hebrew (enclitic mem). 
Another example may be found in that the letter W sometimes 
appeared in the Hebrew of the OT in unexpected places before words 
where its presence seemed superfluous. In the past this fact often 
led scholars to excise the offending letter or reinterpret the

--- Page 189 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 179 
sentence with or without more drastic emendation. However, recent 
studies have shown that this apparently superfluous, or pleonastic, 
w is a stylistic device used for emphasizing a word or for variety 
in style. Other examples, where Ugaritic has helped, relate to the 
use of prepositions. 
The syntactical and grammatical contributions of Ugaritic to 
the understanding of Hebrew are of great significance. Any care-
ful scholar and interpreter, of course, will not fall into the 
trap of reading Hebrew through the eyes of Ugaritic. That this 
danger exists can be abundantly demonstrated. 
When speaking about the interpretation of the sentence one 
cannot avoid speaking about poetry. It is a well-known fact that 
fully 40 per cent of the OT is written in poetry, as is reflected 
in more recent translations (RSV, NEB, NAB). It is not possible 
here to go into the ramifications of the proper understanding of 
Hebrew poetry, but it has to be pointed out that earlier critical 
scholars denied the antiquity of Hebrew poetry and considered many 
poetic passages in the OT to derive from late periods. The ration-
ale for this procedure was based not on the evidence as actually 
found but on a philosophical system of unilinear religious evolu-
tion. But now it has been demonstrated that both poetry and prose 
go back to earliest times in the Hebrew Bible and that one can no 
longer maintain that the earliest poetry followed the oldest prose 
in the OT. Here the finds from Ugarit, which go back to 1400 B.C. 
and before, have aided in an unusual manner in rediscovering the 
complex patterns of repetitive style in Hebrew poetry. (See W. F. 
Albright, Yahweh and the Gods of Canaan [Garden City, New York, 
1968], pp. 1-52.) 
Whereas the understanding of Hebrew poetry--especially its 
repetitive style but also other features--has been aided to an 
unusual degree by ancient Near Eastern texts (especially those 
from Ugarit), it is not to be assumed that the procedure of com-
parative study of poetic literature is not without its problems. 
There is the constant danger that biblical poetry will be read 
through the perspectives of nonbiblical poetry. Although it is 
true that Hebrew poetry has many similarities to non-Hebrew poetic 
literature, it must not be assumed that this means identity. Thus 
a great deal of meticulous study, with careful attention paid to 
the similarities as well as the dissimilarities between Hebrew 
poetry and the poetry of ancient West-Semitic literature, must go 
into these so-called parallel phenomena. Some have reminded recent 
biblical scholars that there is today the danger of pan-Ugariticism 
just as there was earlier emphasis on pan-Babylonianism. These 
warnings do have their place and need to be heeded.

--- Page 190 ---
180 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Because the smallest poetic unit is the sentence, the funda-
mental formal feature of the poetry of the OT is the correspond-
ence of thought in successive lines, known as parallelism of 
members (parallelismus membrorum). The thought content may be 
repeated, contrasted, or advanced in synonymous (see Ps 59:1), 
antithetic (see Ps 1:6), or synthetic parallelism (see Ps 55:6). 
The parallelism may be both within lines and between lines. Thus 
in Hebrew poetic parallelism there is a balancing of thought 
against thought, phrase against phrase, word against word, accord-
ing to the habit of the Hebrew author. (See "The Poetry of the 
Bible," Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commentary, vol. 3, pp. 17-28.) 
The Hebrew poet had a keen ear for the texture of words and 
knew how to model them into brilliant effect with devices of 
alliteration, assonance, paronomasia, and onomatopoeia. An under-
standing of these devices of Hebrew poetry is essential for inter-
pretation of the Hebrew sentence. 
V. Understanding Units  
A unit is a larger whole that is made up of a series of 
sentences or clauses, and it deals with a particular thought or 
an aspect of a larger thought. The understanding of the units has 
a spiraling effect on the understanding of the larger whole. 
In our discussion of the sentence, which is the next smaller 
component of the unit, we have noted that in Hebrew poetry certain 
structures are used (parallelism of members and meter). The poetic 
phrases and sentences are grouped into longer strophic divisions. 
Accordingly, each strophe is the next larger unit. Symmetrical 
articulation of the thought at times argues strongly for the divi-
sion of poetic sections into strophes. We may choose Isaiah's 
famous "Song of the Vineyard," which falls naturally into four 
subdivisions: (a) The care bestowed on the vineyard, Is 5:1, 2; 
(b) the appeal for judgment between the owner and his vineyard, 
vss. 3, 4; (c) the announcement of the vineyard's destruction, 
vss. 5, 6; and (d) the interpretation, vs. 7. Strophes are not 
all of uniform length by any means. Also they do not manifest a 
particular regularity. The attempts of scholars to achieve regu-
larity by deletions and rearrangement of the lines as well as 
strophes must be judged subjective. Emendations and reshuffling 
of the text (as has been introduced recently in Bible translations 
such as NEB and NAB) have no textual evidence to go on. They are 
also contradicted by Ugaritic poetry, with its analogous freedom 
of form. 
Since we are dealing with units and their interpretation it

--- Page 191 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 181 
is inevitable that we touch on what has become known in English 
as form criticism, also known as form history (Formgeschichte). 
This is not the place to discuss the rise of this methodology in 
biblical studies from H. Gunkel (1862-1932) to the present. The 
fundamental insight underlying this methodology that is widely 
applied in OT and NT studies today is the premise that folk memory--
the vehicle of tradition--operates supposedly with small units, 
often no larger than a single couplet of poetry. A scrutiny of 
irreducible units of primitive tradition came on the basis of Ger-
man folklore, which recognized and defined the differences between 
folk tale, myth, saga, and legend (J. and W. Grimm). On the basis 
of this study the assumption arose that similar units reappear--
similar not so much in content as in structure, length, and 
tendency. 
The assumption of a unilinear evolution from small literary 
units to large more complex entities is now proved to be a fallacy. 
This can be demonstrated with regard to the OT on the basis of 
comparative study of ancient Near Eastern literature from about 
2500 B.C. onward (cf. K. A. Kitchen, Ancient Orient and Old 
Testament [Chicago, 1966], pp. 131f.). 
The various assumptions and premises of form criticism as 
applied to the OT and NT are based on the investigations of folk 
memory, as we have indicated in Germanic philology. It is highly 
significant, therefore, that the results of recent investigations 
of folk memory by folklorists have called into question the earlier 
assumptions taken over by biblical scholars (cf. Th. Boman, Die 
Jesus-Vberlieferung im Lichte der neueren Volkskunde [1967]). 
Nevertheless, form criticism has brought about a greater 
awareness of external forms and has emphasized and stimulated the 
appreciation of literary units. Objective criteria must be looked 
for that will aid in identifying a unit on internal grounds. Great 
discrimination and discernment must be applied in order to avoid 
a reading of one literary form, one basic unit, from one type of 
literature or tradition into another. 
Perhaps before leaving this section on units it may be appro-
priate to add a word parenthetically with regard to the function 
and purpose of Bible commentaries. Among Bible commentaries there 
is great and distinct variety in terms of quality and outlook. In 
consulting commentaries the interpreter must never assume that 
there is an infallible one that is correct in every instance. As 
a matter of fact, the interpreter must always evaluate for himself 
a variety of points of view and the evidence presented, which re-
quires not infrequently great skill and technical knowledge. Com-
mentaries written by individuals who have a high view of divine

--- Page 192 ---
182 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
inspiration and who manifest a firm belief in the trustworthiness 
and practical relevance of Scripture are to be preferred to those 
written on the basis of different presuppositions. 
The person who seeks to understand Scripture must constantly 
keep in mind that commentaries should be taken for what they are 
and not as instruments that dictate what the Bible says. It is 
a truism that infallibility eludes any commentator and every com-
mentary. The earnest student of Scripture will rely on the com-
mentaries that not only are most thorough and abreast of up-to-
date scholarship but also loyal to the Scriptures as God's authori-
tative self-revelation. Good commentaries do indeed have a place 
for the one who seeks to understand Scripture, although they must 
be used with discretion. 
VI. Understanding Books and Authors  
Biblical books by the various authors form the next larger 
wholes, and they are made up of a series of units. The understand-
ing of books and authors depends on the understanding of the units 
of which the books are composed. The units in turn are better 
understood through the total outlook and meaning of the authors and 
the books. To speak again in terms of the hermeneutic circle, each 
of the words, phrases, sentences, and units contributes to an 
understanding of the total end product. But at the same time the 
end product aids in the interpretation and understanding of the 
single part. Understanding the single part spirals to constantly 
higher levels on the basis of the understanding of the book, and 
vice versa. 
Undoubtedly every interpreter begins from the viewpoint, 
interests, and concerns that he had prior to studying the particu-
lar text or book. It must be emphasized that the study of a text 
of Scripture is a process of learning. In the process of learning 
one discovers more and more the questions that concerned the author 
of the particular biblical book, the issues that confronted him, 
the problems he was trying to solve, and the material and methodi-
cal resources that were at his disposal for solving them. This is 
to say that ideally one comes finally to put aside one's own ini-
tial interests, concerns, and viewpoints and comes to share those 
of the author by coming to recognize ever more clearly the context 
of the author's thought and speech under divine inspiration. 
From the investigative vantage point the context of the word 
is the sentence, unit, book, or books by the same author. Beyond 
this the context of each of the books of the NT is the canon of 
the NT and the canon of the OT is the context of each of the books

--- Page 193 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 183 
of the OT. Finally the entire Scripture is the context for each 
word, sentence, unit, and other division. 
When we speak of the context of the entire inspired Scripture 
we do not mean to imply that the individual human writers of the 
scriptural books do not have their own nuances, emphases, and 
various contributions to make to the total revelation as presented 
in the Bible. It is imperative, indeed, to respect the message 
and theology of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, and not to 
confuse them with one another, just as it is imperative to respect 
the message and theology of Paul and not to confuse them with 
those of John, Luke, or any other NT writer. Each writer of the 
Bible must be studied in and for himself. This emphasis, however, 
is not meant to imply that there is no unity of the biblical mes-
sage; it is not meant to imply that NT theology is impossible; it 
is also not meant to imply that contradictions are to be expected 
between the OT writers and the NT writers. The Bible bears wit-
ness to a faith in one God, one Lord, one baptism (see Eph 4:5, 6), 
and a presentation explaining that one faith is not an impossi-
bility. But its presentation will be so much the richer if the 
nuances, emphases, and special contributions of the individual 
biblical writers are respected and allowed to form a unity within 
the diversity. The Bible must be viewed as a whole in order that 
the relation of its parts may best be seen. 
A proper understanding of the biblical writers' thought thus 
can grow only on the basis of the intrinsic methodology of bibli- 
cal interpretation outlined so far. 	 The guiding principle can 
thus never be an extrinsic or external one, whether it be tradition, 
philosophy, or anything else. Any external or extrinsic principle 
of interpretation will lead to some distortion of the biblical 
message. 
Although the interpreter in attempting to discover what the 
biblical writers meant employs carefully developed rules of inter-
pretation, he differs from the historian of religion (be he agnos-
tic or believer) in that he is convinced that through the biblical 
authors an inspired message is communicated for modern man. The 
fundamental presupposition is the inspired character of the canon 
of Scripture to which Scripture testifies. It is important to 
emphasize that the meaning for the faith of men today cannot be 
something completely different from the meaning intended by the 
biblical writers for their contemporaries. Any attempt to under-
stand the biblical authors that fails to recognize a basic homo-
geneity between the interpreter's meaning "now' and the meaning 
of the message "then" fails to bring their inspired messages to 
men of today.

--- Page 194 ---
184 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
A valid and normative interpretation of the message of the 
biblical authors, therefore, must ascertain first of all what they 
meant, and to this degree it must be a descriptive presentation. 
The means to achieve this are not the logic or the metaphysics of 
a philosophical or scientific system foreign to the biblical writ-
ers, however interesting this mode of interpretation might be for 
other purposes. The methodology is, rather, that of the self-
interpretation of Scripture, with its emphasis on the literal 
meaning of the text (unless a figure, symbol, etc., is used) and 
due emphasis on philological, historical, and theological research 
joined to empathy for Christian faith. 
On the basis of what we have said so far it is clear that a 
hermeneutic adequate to the Scriptural witness must have its her-
meneutic starting point in the principle of the self-interpretation 
of Scripture based on the biblical teaching of inspiration and on 
recognition of the total canon as the valid context for the inter-
pretation of Scripture. It has its basis in the recognition that 
God is the author of all Scripture and that He has chosen human 
authors to communicate His truths in human language. 
VII. Understanding Scripture as a Whole  
The final aim of all biblical interpretation is not only to 
understand the single parts of the Scripture, whether words, 
phrases, clauses, sentences, units, books, or entire blocks of 
writings with their interrelationships but also to understand God's 
will and purpose in the Bible as a whole. We have been counseled 
to "learn to view the word as a whole, and to see the relation of 
its parts" (Ed, 190). 
The emphasis throughout this chapter has been not only to 
understand what the inspired writers intended to say but also to 
understand precisely what God intended to say in, with, and through 
the words of the inspired prophets. Peter wrote, "The prophets 
who prophesied of the grace that was to be yours searched and 
inquired about this salvation; they inquired what person or time 
was indicated by the Spirit of Christ within them when predicting 
the sufferings of Christ and the subsequent glory. It was revealed 
to them that they were serving not themselves but you, in the 
things which have now been announced to you by those who preached 
the good news to you through the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, 
things into which angels long to look" (1 Pe 1:10-12, RSV). Peter 
indicates that the prophets of the past to whom these great scenes 
were revealed "longed to understand their full import" (PK, 731). 
This indicates that the inspired writers themselves recognized 
that their words had a deeper level of meaning and a fuller import,

--- Page 195 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 185 
which they sensed but did not fully comprehend themselves. "The 
prophets who were favored with the special illumination of the 
Spirit did not fully comprehend the import of the revelations 
committed to them" (GC, 344). 
The fuller import and deeper meaning of Scripture is a mean-
ing that is intended or implicit in the words of the Bible whether 
or not the inspired author is aware of it. The fuller import and 
deeper meaning is not a reading into the literal sense and meaning 
of ideas alien or extraneous to it. The fuller sense or fuller 
import and deeper meaning of Scripture is not something that is 
alien to the intent of the biblical words. To the contrary, it 
is a characteristic of the fuller import and deeper meaning of 
Scripture to be homogeneous with the literal meaning and sense; 
that is to say, it is a development and outgrowth of what the 
original inspired writer put into words. It seems to be clear 
beyond the shadow of a doubt that the fuller import and deeper 
meaning of Scripture has nothing to do with a threefold or a four-
fold sense of scripture of medieval times or with the allegorical 
method of exegesis. A basic principle of interpretation applicable 
in the discovery of the fuller import and deeper meaning of Scrip-
ture is to let an inspired writer function in the recovery of the 
full meaning of the words of inspiration. 
In speaking on the subject of the fuller import and deeper 
meaning of Scripture, the contention that the interpreter may 
understand the text more fully and more accurately than the author 
himself needs to be qualified. The interpreter may gain a more 
comprehensive understanding than the author had on the basis of 
the context of the entire inspired revelation, allowing the entire 
inspired Scriptures to illuminate the meaning of a particular text. 
"The scriptural canon can be expected to fulfill its hermeneutical 
task only if it is allowed to become active in its totality with 
regard to the interpretation of the single book and author." 
--K. FrOr, Biblische Hermeneutik (Munich, 1967), p. 65. This 
hermeneutical function of the canon as a whole also prevents that 
selective treatment of Scripture known as a "canon in the canon." 
The understanding of the text by the original author, on the 
other hand, is more complete in the sense that his word spoke to 
the concrete historical situation of the people of the time when 
he wrote. This aspect of the text cannot be better understood by 
any interpreter than by the inspired author himself, because the 
interpreter presumably cannot have a firmer grasp of all the 
details and circumstances that were known by the inspired writer 
himself. 
Christ himself showed a fuller import and deeper sense of

--- Page 196 ---
186 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Scripture when He talked to the disciples on the way to Emmaus, 
as recorded by Luke, "And beginning with Moses and with all the 
prophets, he explained to them the things concerning himself in 
all scriptures" (Lk 24:27, NASB). The divine thoughts communicated 
to the prophets by inspiration were embodied in human words, the 
full import and deeper meaning of which these inspired writers 
themselves longed to know. Through further inspired revelation 
God opened up the fuller import and deeper meaning of the earlier 
words of Scripture. 
In speaking of further revelation it must not be assumed that 
the Holy Spirit ceased to communicate light after the biblical 
canon was closed. The OT knows of prophets named and unnamed who 
received revelations in order to give counsel and instruction, 
warning and encouragement, in matters in no way relating to the 
giving of the inspired Scriptures. There are numbers of instances 
in which prophets spoke forth during OT and NT times whose words 
were not recorded and embodied in the canon of Scripture. In like 
manner, when the biblical canon was closed the Holy Spirit did not 
cease to work in enlightening the understanding and opening to 
the mind of sincere seekers of truth the deep things of God's 
inspired Word. When Jesus gave the promise of the Comforter, He 
said, "But when He, the Spirit of Truth, comes, He will guide you 
into all the truth; . . . and He will disclose to you what is to 
come" On 16:13, NASB). It is apparent that the Holy Spirit will 
continue to work until the end of time. 
Paul prayed for the believers at Ephesus, "That the God of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a 
spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of Him. I 
pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened, so that you 
may know what is the hope of His calling, what are the riches of 
the glory of His inheritance in the saints" (Eph 1:17, 18, NASB). 
Paul here expresses his belief that God gives guidance to the 
community of believers in the understanding of revelation and in 
providing understanding with regard to the deeper things of Scrip-
ture. God does this through the Holy Spirit on a personal level 
through illumination. The person illuminated by the Holy Spirit 
is always bound to the further revelation of the deeper sense of 
Scripture as contained in all inspired writings. 
The fuller import and deeper meaning of Scripture originates 
with God. The words of Scripture contain divine thoughts, and 
it is natural that an understanding of these divine thoughts, 
which could bear fuller import and deeper meaning, could most 
properly be gained by further revelation. A safe guide to lead 
to the right understanding of the fuller import and deeper mean-
ing of Scripture is another inspired writer. This criterion and

--- Page 197 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 187 
principle is a safeguard against subjectivity on the part of the 
individual interpreter. Let us now turn to a number of examples 
that are illustrative of the fuller import and deeper meaning of 
Scripture. 
1. Typology 
Typology is based on historical connections and is bound to 
the historical sense of Scripture. In biblical typology the typi-
cal sense of words, descriptions, events, actions, institutions, 
and persons becomes fully apparent through the later antitype. 
Thus the type is always incomplete until the antitype brings out 
the fuller import and deeper meaning of the type. God as the 
author of Scripture placed within the type a prefiguration of 
what is later identified as antitype. The fuller import and deeper 
meaning of the type is discerned most adequately through further 
inspired revelation. 
We find the correlation of type and antitype already in the 
OT. Isaiah speaks of the eschatological return to paradise (Is 
11:6-8; 65:17-25); Hosea looks back to the congregation of Israel 
in the wilderness as a type of restored Israel (Hos 2:16ff.). 
The ideal time of the Davidic reign is a type of future unity in 
Amos 9:llff. 
There is a strong typological relationship between the OT 
and the NT. Stephen pointed to Moses as a type of Jesus, the 
"Redeemer" or "Deliverer" (Acts 7:20-40). Paul develops a typology 
built on the Exodus (1 Cor 10:1-13). The history of Israel in the 
Exodus is a type of spiritual Israel (1 Cor 10:11). Jonah's ex-
perience in the belly of the fish is a type of Christ's resurrection 
(Mt 12:40). 
The prophetic saying of Hos 11:1 may be seen as applied to 
Jesus in terms of typology (Mt 2:15). The passage in Hosea appears 
to refer to the Exodus from Egypt and a speaking of Yahweh to 
ancient Israel. The quotation of this passage by Matthew indicates 
that Jesus, the antitype, is in part at least, the new Israel. 
Just as ancient Israel placed itself in the hands of God, so the 
Messiah, Jesus, placed Himself under the words of God, which are 
also fulfilled in Him (C. H. Dodd; G. W. Grogan). 
The correlation of "type" to "antitype," which is of scrip-
tural origin, indicates how the understanding of Scripture as a 
whole is enhanced by the application of the principle of "Scrip-
ture its own interpreter." The typical sense becomes fully appar-
ent with the antitype. Thus the type is always incomplete until

--- Page 198 ---
188 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the antitype brings out the fuller import and deeper meaning of 
the type. The fuller import and deeper sense of Scripture as 
expressed in typology is brought forth by the larger context of 
inspired revelation. Thus it must be concluded that God as the 
author of Scripture placed within the type a prefiguration of 
what is later identified as antitype. 
2. Prediction and fulfillment  
The pattern of promise or prediction and fulfillment is a 
category of biblical thought that contains crucial elements of a 
fuller import and deeper meaning (1 Pe 1:10-12). On the basis of 
the assurance that the Lord's word is not "vain" (Dt 32:46, 47), 
there is an all-prevailing correspondence between the promissory, 
or predictive, words of the Lord spoken through His servants the 
prophets and their fulfillment in the historical events of the OT 
and the NT. 
Repeatedly the importance of the context of the whole Bible 
has been emphasized. For the NT writers the OT provided the key 
to recognition of Jesus as the Messiah predicted by the prophets 
of old. The OT thus is the key to unlock the NT (see Ey, 579) as 
the NT unlocks the Old (see CT, 462f.). Each testament is essen-
tial to the understanding of the other. And both shed light upon 
each other for mutual understanding and self-interpretation. The 
well-known OT scholar W. Eichrodt expressed his convictions as 
follows: "In addition to this historical movement from the Old 
Testament to the New there is a current of life flowing in reverse 
direction from the New Testament to the Old. This reverse rela-
tionship also elucidates the full significance of the realm of 
Old Testament thought."--Theology of the Old Testament (Phila-
delphia, 1961) I, 26. The concept of the larger context is like-
wise affirmed (although each holds his own view) by the famous G. 
von Rad (Old Testament Theology [London, 1965], II, 369) and also 
by the OT scholar H. W. Wolff, who maintains that "in the New 
Testament is found the context of the Old, which, as its histor-
ical goal, reveals the total meaning of the Old Testament."--"The 
Hermeneutics of the Old Testament," Essays on Old Testament Her-
meneutics, ed. C. Westermann (Richmond, Va., 1963), p. 181. 
Crucial for the goal of the self-interpretation of the text 
is the interpreter's willingness that the remaining scriptural 
testimonies throw light upon the meaning of the individual text 
(cf. H. Diem, Was heisst schriftgemass? [GUtersloh, 1958], p. 38). 
The fuller import and deeper meaning of the pattern of promise or 
prediction and fulfillment is not to be found behind, beneath, or 
above the biblical text. It is inherent in the texts themselves.

--- Page 199 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 189 
The pattern of prediction and fulfillment is found within the 
OT itself and is not only between the OT and the NT. A prediction 
that Pharaoh would not listen to the Israelites (Ex 4:21; 7:3) is 
noted to have been fulfilled in Ex 7:13. The Lord had predicted 
that the murmuring congregation at Sinai should die in the wilder-
ness (Num 14:29, 32-33). Later it is reported that "among these 
there was not a man of them that were numbered at Sinai. For the 
Lord had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness" 
(Num 26:65). There is an all-prevailing correspondence between 
the Word of the Lord and its fulfillment in historical events as 
noted in the books of Kings (2 Sa 7:13=1 Ki 8:20; 1 Ki 11:29ff.= 
1 Ki 12:15b; 1 Ki 13=2 Ki 23:16-18). Many additional examples 
could be cited. 
The pattern of promise and fulfillment also exists between 
the OT predictions and its NT fulfillments. It must be clearly 
recognized that the basis of legitimacy for invoking the NT in 
the determination of prophetic fulfillments lies in commitment to 
the unity of the Bible. If the same God inspired with the same 
Holy Spirit both testaments, then He must possess the right to 
explain to us in one what he meant in the other. Recognizing the 
unity of the entire Bible the OT predicts the coming, mission, and 
death of the Messiah, which the NT describes as fulfilled in Jesus 
Christ. The NT writers maintain consistently that in and through 
Jesus Christ the word spoken in the OT in its predictions has re-
ceived its complete fulfillment. Paul clearly expresses this in 
2 Cor 1:20, "For all the promises of God find their Yes in Him" 
(RSV). The heart of the NT gospel was the proclamation of the 
fulfillment of the OT promises. The NT's commitment to the truth-
fulness of the Word of God demands an interpretation of prophetic 
fulfillments that is harmonious with God's truth as understood 
elsewhere in Scripture. 
The first of the famous quotations of fulfillment in the 
Gospel of Matthew states that the virgin birth of Jesus took place 
in order "to fulfill what the Lord hath spoken by the prophet: 
'Behold,a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall 
be called Emmanuel"' (Mt 1:22f., RSV). The Hebrew word under dis-
cussion in the original prediction in Is 7:14 is ccamah, which 
means "a young woman of marriageable age" and who generally would 
be a virgin. The word chosen by Isaiah could imply virginity and 
allow that the mother-to-be was unmarried, and a woman of good 
rather than ill repute. Various recent translations read in Is 
7:14 "young woman" (RSV, JB (margin), NEB), which does not deny 
virginity, whereas other translations continue with a traditional 
rendering of "virgin" (NAB, NASB). 
The translators of the LXX chose the Greek term parthenos,

--- Page 200 ---
190 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
meaning "virgin," which was not a mistranslation of the Hebrew 
term picked up from one of its several possible semantic connota-
tions. The writer of the Gospel of Matthew, in turn, quoted from 
the LXX, which was the authorized version of his day. According 
to this line of connection God included within this OT prophecy 
the reference to the virgin birth of Christ, even though the pos-
sibility exists that the prophet himself may not have been aware 
of it. There is a basic homogeneity between Is 7:14 and Mt 1:22f., 
which indicates Matthew neither read a new meaning into the Isa-
ianic prediction nor misapplied it. Under inspiration the NT 
writer was guided to unfold a fuller import and deeper meaning of 
the original prediction. Inspiration is a sure guide to the fuller 
import and deeper meaning of a part of Scripture. 
The fuller import and deeper meaning in a scriptural passage 
usually follow the characteristic of homogeneity. The writer of 
Hebrews quotes the phrase, "Thou art my Son, today I have begotten 
thee" (Heb 1:5, RSV). Although the reference in Ps 2:7 may have 
been used at times in the celebration of the enthronement of the 
king of Judah in the Davidic line (cf. 2 Sa 7:14), the words of 
the Psalm refer to the ideal future king, which can be most clearly 
seen on the basis of the writer of the letter to the Hebrews. The 
fuller Messianic import and the deeper sense of this passage are 
identified by further inspired revelation. Here again there is a 
basic homogeneity between the Psalmist's words and their fulfill-
ment in Jesus Christ. Although there was never a time when the 
Father could not say to Jesus, "Thou art my Son," there came a day 
in time, namely, the "today" of Ps 2:7, when by the resurrection 
in glorified humanity Jesus Christ was begotten to a status He had 
never had before (Acts 13:33; Rom 8:29). Examples illustrating 
this principle of interpretation could be multiplied many times 
over. For the purpose of this discussion it has, however, become 
apparent that the fuller import and deeper meaning of the Bible 
do not constitute a second sense in distinction or contradiction 
to the intent of Scripture. The literal meaning of the Bible with 
its fuller import and deeper sense share a basic homogeneity and 
congruency that bind them together. 
It should be emphasized that one must not assume that every 
single text must be expected to have a fuller import and deeper 
meaning. A genuine and normative fuller import and deeper meaning 
as intended by God through divine inspiration is unveiled most 
properly by another inspired writer. This means that there is no 
room for any subjective and private interpretation of the Bible, 
because this principle secures the self-interpretation of Scripture 
that we have emphasized throughout.

--- Page 201 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 191 
3. Patterns of Unity  
The unity of the Bible, of both testaments, has its source in 
certainty that it is inspired by the same Holy Spirit who origi-
nates in the triune God. The Christian interpreter maintains the 
unity of both testaments, but he recognizes that within this unity 
there is diversity. But the diversity is not emphasized to such 
a degree that the inner, underlying unity of Scripture is destroyed. 
The messages of the various Bible writers belong so intimately to-
gether that neither one can be fully understood without the other, 
just as the OT cannot be fully understood without the NT, and the 
NT without the OT. 
The interpreter of the Bible will always work to the utmost 
of his ability to interpret the Scriptures with a view to the 
whole. All books of the Bible can be expected to fulfill their 
hermeneutical task only if they are allowed to become active in 
their totality in interpreting the single book or part within it 
as each part or book functions hermeneutically in the interpreta-
tion of the whole. 
READING LIST  
James Barr, The Semantics of Biblical Language. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1961. 313 pp. 
An exceedingly helpful volume that analyzes some widely 
used methods employed in word studies in current biblical 
lexicography, with special attention to the linguistic and 
theological principles involved. 
Louis Berkhof, Principles of Interpretation. Grand Rapids: Baker 
Book House, 1950. 169 pp. 
A Reformed theologian outlines the history of hermeneuti-
cal principles among Jews and Christians and develops his 
methods of, grammatical, historical, and theological interpre-
tation. 
E. C. Blackman, Biblical Interpretation. Philadelphia: West-
minster Press, 1957. 212 pp. 
The author provides a helpful overview of the develop-
ment of hermeneutics from rabbinic exegesis to the present, 
with more extensive attention to the period of modern criti-
cism and its influence on present methods of interpretation 
from a neo-orthodox perspective.

--- Page 202 ---
192 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
T. Boman, Hebrew Thought Compared With Greek. Philadelphia: 
Westminster Press, 1960. 224 pp. 
An elaborate study based on full knowledge of the rele-
vant literature, contrasting Israelite ways of thinking with 
Greek thought in such a way as to create a maximal logical 
and psychological contrast that has a definite bearing on 
biblical interpretation. 
Kurt FrOr, Biblische Hermeneutik. 3d ed. Munich: Chr. Kaiser 
Verlag, 1967. 408 pp. 
A comprehensive work on the nature and structure of 
biblical hermeneutics with emphasis on the function of the 
historical-critical method, the hermeneutical circle, canon, 
literary form, context, unity of Scripture, etc., written 
from a moderately liberal perspective. 
J. C. K. von Hofmann, Interpreting the Bible. Minneapolis: 
Augsburg Publ. House, 1959. 
This work (first published posthumously in 1880 in 
German) has become a classic in the field of conservative 
works on hermeneutic. 
Simon Kistemaker, ed., Interpreting God's Word Today. Grand Rapids: 
Baker Book House, 1970. 313 pp. 
A symposium of seven articles written by an international 
team of evangelical scholars focusing on the historicity of 
Genesis (esp. chs. 1-11), event and interpretation in the OT, 
the interpretation of the Gospels and the resurrection, and 
the inspiration and authority of the Bible. 
A. Berkeley Mickelsen, Interpreting the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1963. 425 pp. 
A careful presentation of general and special principles 
of interpretation by an evangelical scholar who believes that 
much of the variety in interpretation by liberals and conser-
vatives is good. 
Bernard Ramm, Protestant Biblical Interpretation. A Textbook of 
Hermeneutics, 3d ed. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1970. 
298 pp. 
A widely used conservative textbook on methods and 
procedures of biblical interpretation that provides concise 
critical evaluations of the hermeneutical views of scholars 
of liberal persuasion. 
James M. Robinson and John B. Cobb, Jr., eds., The New Hermeneu- 
tic. New York: Harper and Row, 1964. 243 pp. 
An introduction to recent developments on hermeneutic

--- Page 203 ---
Principles of Biblical Interpretation 	 193 
in contemporary liberal theology based upon the foundation 
of historical-critical scholarship, the philosophy of the 
later Heidegger and the thought of Bultmann. The introduc-
tory essay on "Hermeneutic Since Barth" (77 pp.) is of sig-
nificance for understanding the position of liberal theolo-
gians subscribing to the "new hermeneutic." 
J. D. Smart, The Interpretation of Scripture. Philadelphia: 
Westminster Press, 1960. 317 pp. 
An extensive discussion of problems of the interpreta-
tion of Scripture in twentieth-century critical biblical 
scholarship with special emphasis on the unity, inspiration, 
and authority of the Bible written by a liberal scholar. 
John F. Walvoord, ed., Inspiration and Interpretation. Grand 
Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1957. 280 pp. 
Ten leading evangelical scholars discuss the methods 
of biblical interpretation of Irenaeus, Augustine, Luther, 
Calvin, Wesley, Sanday, Rowley, and Niebuhr and provide an 
essay on the revelation of Scripture.

--- Page 204 ---
An associate secretary of the General 
Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, 
Washington, D.C. since 1970, Dr. 
Bernard E. Seton served in evangelis-
tic, departmental, editorial, educa-
tional, and administrative roles in 
Britain, West Africa, South Africa, 
Southern Europe, and the United 
States. He earned the Ph.D. degree 
at the University of Cape Town, South 
Africa, in 1962.

--- Page 205 ---
11. Interpretation of Biblical  
History, Wisdom, and Poetry 
BERNARD E. SETON 
Associate Secretary 
Gdneral Conference of SDA 
Within the rich variety of literature available in the Bible, 
a hermeneutic for the categories of history, wisdom, and poetry 
is the concern of this chapter. 
The Jewish canon of Scripture recognizes the law (Torah), the 
prophets (Nebirim), and the writings (Kethubim), and arranges its 
books according to these classifications. The Christian Church 
has followed the Hebrew canon from Genesis to Judges, but then has 
preferred to bring together the remaining specifically historical 
books, thus compassing Ruth to Esther. It has then grouped the 
books Job to the Song of Solomon in a combined wisdom-poetry cate-
gory, and completed its OT with the major and minor prophets. 
In the twenty-seven books of the NT, subdivisions are easily 
defined. The first five books concern themselves with history, 
then come the twenty-one letters, and one piece of apocalyptic 
literature--the Revelation of John--brings the entire canon to a 
close. 
This cataloging, no matter how convenient and attractive for 
general purposes, does not entirely meet our needs here, where we 
are considering the principles that govern our interpretation of 
biblical history, wisdom, and poetry. History is a term that has 
two distinct applications: first, to the successive events of 
which life is composed; and, second and somewhat more narrowly, to 
the record and assessment of those events. The Bible contributes 
to both kinds of history. Its production and compilation are part 
of the historical process, and its pages chronicle millennia of 
events that furnish the warp and woof of recorded history while 
themselves forming part of the substance from which additional 
written history is compiled. 
The part of this chapter that deals with history will confine 
itself to the second definition, to the written record that pur-

--- Page 206 ---
196 	 A Symposium on Biblical.Hermeneutics 
ports to pin down a report of events that actually occurred in 
time. It must be remembered, however, that the Bible ranges be-
yond time, delves into eternity, both past and future, and thus 
penetrates awe-inspiring areas where merely human capacities can-
not adequately operate. This concept must necessarily deal with 
a philosophy of history as well as with the records that comprise 
history. 
Such thoughts introduce the idea that history in the Bible 
cannot be corralled within those books that obviously contain the 
chronological record of happenings that took place in the lives of 
certain men and peoples.' It must be broadened to include the sec-
tions of biblical literature--such as poetry, prophecy, and epis-
tles--that are themselves raw material from which formal history 
can be quarried. This approach makes the entire Bible a histori-
cal source book that must command the serious attention of those 
who claim to interpret history. 
In a similar though less significant way poetry occupies 
large sections of books that are not primarily regarded as poetical 
--Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and most of the minor prophets. Sim-
ilarly, the distinctive Semitic production known as wisdom litera-
ture crops up in unexpected places. Those who wish to study each 
subject in depth must therefore dig in many areas and not restrict 
their attentions to the formal groupings but embrace the whole 
canon of Scripture in their research. Here, however, limitations 
of space demand that we concentrate on the broad divisions indi-
cated in our chapter heading. Furthermore, other contributors to 
this symposium have ably covered general and introductory material, 
leaving us free to build in specific areas on their foundation. 
History  
Although we accept the division of the Bible into the OT and 
NT, we must remember that they are but parts of a whole and claim 
the one God as their Inspirer. As John Marsh observes: "In both 
Testaments the same God offers the same salvation by the same 
Saviour through the same actions."--Biblical Authority for Today, 
p. 189. We therefore need to look at the whole and not create an 
artificial barrier between its two main parts. 
Adventist interpretation is built on some definite presuppo-
sitions. They are outlined in chapter 10 under the title "General 
Principles of Interpretation." Here they need only be summarized. 
The Church accepts the entire Bible as the inspired Word of 
God delivered through human instrumentality under the guidance of

--- Page 207 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 197 
the Holy Spirit. This position, based on an act of faith support-
ed by reason, deeply affects one's approach to biblical history. 
It formulates attitudes to areas that are beyond the unaided reach 
of man--creation, eternity, and heaven--and also to the more prox-
imate reaches of man's own doings on national and personal levels. 
The acceptance of the biblical canon involves value judgments and 
declares that the accepted books agree with this overview of world 
history. When such convictions are established, the groundwork is 
laid for the outworking of their implications in the historical 
records contained in both Testaments. 
Belief in the inspiration of Scripture, however, does not 
relieve the interpreter of the obligation to examine the records 
rigorously. This calls for textual criticism to establish the 
reliability of the Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek texts; for literary 
criticism to reach an understanding of what each author has written; 
for word study to determine the significance of key words in their 
context; and for grammatical exegesis to utilize the results of 
such study. But these disciplines are not conducted in an intel-
lectual vacuum. They are influenced by hermeneutical principles 
applicable to inspired writings: by the need to permit the Holy 
Spirit to guide the understanding of the records, by recognition 
of the overriding spiritual intent of the writings, by acknowledg-
ment of their unity, by agreement to allow Scripture to interpret 
Scripture, by acceptance of the concept of supernaturalism, and by 
drawing theological conclusions from the documents that are studied. 
Biblical history raises and answers some of life's profoundest 
questions. Whence came man? When came man? Why came man? Is man 
going up or down? What will be his end? Is he his own judge, or 
is he responsible to an infinitely higher power? Whence came the 
earth? Is it the result of natural or divine law, of chance or 
design? What is its age? What of its future? Is time endless, 
or will it end in a timeless eternity? 
The Bible grapples with these mind-shaking questions; it does 
not evade them, it confronts them. It categorically declares: 
"In the beginning God . . ." (Gn 1:1). On this platform it builds 
its whole philosophy; from it stems the Judeo-Christian approach 
to the past, present, and hereafter. We may reject that approach, 
but we cannot justly deride or ignore it. It commands a most 
thoughtful, positive respect and eventual acceptance or rejection. 
The problem confronting the Bible student today differs only 
in degree and not in kind from that which has always faced mankind, 
namely, how to relate to unbelief in his contemporaries who have 
access to the same sources of faith as are open to him. There 
never has been universal acceptance of biblical claims, not even

--- Page 208 ---
198 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
during such peaks of faith as the Apostolic, Reformation, and 
Evangelical ages. We do well, therefore, to remind ourselves that 
the validity of teaching does not depend on its espousal by all 
who meet it. Truth is proud. It is no cringing suppliant curry-
ing popular favor. It must be evaluated on its own intrinsic 
merits, and its devotees must have the courage to champion its 
cause irrespective of the numbers who keep them company. "If the 
Lord be God, follow him" (1 Ki 18:21), and face the skeptics hon-
estly and courageously. 
Old Testament  
Many hermeneutical methods have been and still are being used 
in OT study. They range through the allegorical, mythical, mysti-
cal, pietistic, naturalistic, rationalistic, moralistic, apologeti-
cal, grammatical, and historical--with the last two being most 
frequently used by the Adventist interpreter. 
The range of OT history is vast, unmatched by any comparable 
document. It covers a minimum of four thousand years in dealing 
with human history and impinges on eternity in its references to 
Deity. It looks at the Creation scene, visits Eden, Ararat, Ur, 
Bethel, Raamses, Sinai, Jericho, Shiloh, Salem, Babylon, Shushan, 
and Jerusalem, and penetrates beyond history into an eternity to 
come. Because its approach is creationist, it is, also eschatolog-
ical. Its pattern is set by its theism, by its consequent crea-
tionism, by its insistence that the eternal God is at the center 
of all history. The student must recognize this OT philosophy and 
determine his attitude toward it, for it is the keystone around 
which succeeding biblical history is built. If fiat creation as 
revealed in Genesis 1 is rejected, one is at odds with all the 
records that follow (e.g. Ex 20, Dt 5, 1 Ki 8, Job 38, Ps 19, Is 
40, Hab 3, et al.). At the same time it must be recognized that 
Gn 1 is not given as a complete scientific explanation of the cre-
ation of our world and its solar system. It seeks to introduce 
God as the Prime Cause, the Creator, the Lord of the universe and 
of mankind. It sets the stage for Adam and Eve as prominent fig-
ures in the divine plan for a sinless eternity, enabling us to 
measure their abbreviated history against that eternal background. 
It also establishes a vital element in theology: God's word is the 
creating factor. No matter how that word functions, embodied in 
the Word once made flesh, it is the agent that creates everything 
that is made (Jn 1:1). 
The Exodus is a second focal point around which much biblical 
history revolves. Its events are central to Israel's history. It 
cannot be excised from Scripture without leaving a gaping wound

--- Page 209 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 199 
that only its restoration can heal. Furthermore, its typological 
significance, involving the person and work of Christ, makes it 
of vital importance to Christian doctrine. Nonetheless, we must 
acknowledge that its relation to secular history still poses prob-
lems, that some critical questions remain to be answered, and that 
caution is preferable to dogmatism until some vexing historical 
conundrums are settled. 
Agnostics spend comparatively little time dissecting prophecy, 
poetry, or the didactic and spiritual elements of Scripture. They 
focus their fire on the historical sections, especially the Pen-
tateuch, with its records of Creation, the Flood, the tower of 
Babel, Egyptian bondage, the Exodus, and the settlement of Pales-
tine. This focus gives prominence to the historical books and 
makes it imperative for the conservative interpreter to be a mas-
ter of their contents, well able to defend their authenticity. 
Their study should sharpen legitimate critical faculties, encour-
age use of linguistic tools and grammatical insights, promote a 
grasp of the total scope of history, and lead to a God's-eye view 
of the temporal scene. "Reason is a divine, not a devilish gift 
to man, and piety needs to use it properly, not to spurn it."--
E. C. Blackman, Biblical Interpretation, p. 33. 
The exercise of reason will remind us of the many centuries 
that have passed since the latest OT words were penned and of the 
further centuries that flowed by before the canon was fixed. There 
was ample opportunity for the editing of original documents before 
they took the form in which we now know them. 
It will also be acknowledged that Scripture is selective: it 
does not attempt and indeed could never succeed in telling the 
whole story (see 1 Chr 29:29); neither does it contain God's total 
revelation. It records all that God saw necessary to lead men to 
salvation. When considering that revelation we need to allow for 
the divine silence, reserving room for what has not been said as 
well as giving diligent attention to all that has been preserved. 
We shall also be conscious of the loose mold into which the Bible 
record is cast, and never cease to marvel at the thoroughness with 
which the Lord conveys essential knowledge in so diffuse a form. 
This discursive style is the manner in which the Lord of history 
chose to convey His revelation. 
Part of our task is to discover the master pattern through 
Spirit-guided study, constructing a unified picture out of the 
heterogeneous pieces supplied in the OT. This can be a fascinat-
ing occupation, tantalizing at times, but faith nourishing not 
faith destroying, holding out and satisfying the prospect of 
spiritual discovery.

--- Page 210 ---
200 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
It has been customary to lay great stress on the traditional 
authorship of.the OT books. Where such writers are named in the 
NT the question of authorship is clearly important because it in-
volves the reliability of Scripture; but apart from such instances 
(e.g. Christ's citing Moses) the question is not always vital to 
a correct interpretation of a given book. The authors of Joshua 
and Judges are nowhere identified in the Bible, yet this silence 
does not detract from the value of the books. Recognition of 
multiple authorship and the work of compilers is quite consistent 
with lofty views of inspiration (see the Psalms). One should 
therefore refrain from making unsubstantiable claims that will 
create unnecessary difficulties for the orthodox and call down 
ridicule from the critics. Generally it will suffice to accept 
the OT's own claim that it records the speech, thoughts, and de-
signs of the Almighty (e.g. Gn 3:9-19; 22; 12:1-3; 32:24-30; Ex 3; 
20; 1 Sa 3:11-14; 2 Sa 23:1-3; 1 Ki 17:2-4; Job 1:6-12; Is 1:10-
20; 8:1; 51:16, 22; Jer 1:4-19; Eze 6:1; and throughout the minor 
prophets). (See also chapter 1, p. 11. 
Further consideration of the selective nature of OT history 
reveals that it has a common thread running through its component 
parts--God's covenantal purpose. One event is chosen for inclu-
sion in preference to another because of its bearing on the devel-
opment of the covenant theme, God's plan for His people and its 
fulfillment through Israel and Israel's Lord. Yet this does not 
produce a solely Israelitish, or, as some would say, Jewish his-
tory. The Bible has an outlook that embraces all mankind (Gn 1:1, 
26; 3:15; 12:1-3; Ps 72:17-19; Jn 3:16; Rev 11:15). 
This line of thought is neatly summarized by the German term 
Heilsgeschichte ("salvation history"), the concept that suggests, 
among others, that the criterion for the selection of biblical 
material is the relationship of individual events to the total 
plan for mankind's redemption. We take this in its broad rather 
than narrow sense, for we believe in the historicity of the events 
recorded in the Bible, and do not reduce them to the status of 
myths. We distill Heilsgeschichte from the records rather than 
straitjacketing biblical history into the mold of Heilsgeschichte 
as if it were conforming to a set literary pattern. Correctly 
conceived and rightly used, the biblical approach to its own nec-
essarily limited fields of history can be the touchstone for eval-
uating all history. This thought suggests that there is no purely 
secular history: it is possible to view all history as HeiZsge-
schichte, even that which is distinctly secular (geschichte). But 
unaided man cannot accurately perceive this salvation element. He 
needs God's revelatory word to keep him ever conscious of the re-
demptive direction in which all history is moving. That word is 
richly present in the OT historical books (e.g., Gn 3:15; Abel's

--- Page 211 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 201 
sacrifice, Gn 4:1-8; Noah and the Flood, Gn 6-8; the Exodus, Ex, 
Num, Dt; Rahab, Jos 2, 6). 
A defined, limited concept of progressive revelation is inher-
ent in biblical history. There is an increasing brightness of rev-
elation as conveyed by man though not as seen by God. The Almighty 
is not subject to progress. He is "the same yesterday, and today, 
and for ever"; "I am the Lord, I change not" (Hb 13:8; Mal 3:6). 
But man's understanding of God's ways progresses as he studies the 
way the Lord has led his predecessors. Revelation provided through 
experience is cumulative, and thus progressive, and we may legit-
imately look for an increasing, though not always even, intensity 
of illumination on the continuum of history, while remembering that 
"Yonder all before us lie, Deserts of vast eternity." The great 
themes of creation, redemption, and eschatology are as icebergs 
with their tips showing above the surface of conventional history 
while their bulk lies hidden below. 
An important hermeneutic field is OT foreshadowing of Christ, 
but it is fraught with pitfalls, most of which are dug by hind-
sight. Care must be exercised lest more prophetic message than 
the inspired writers received or intended to convey is read into 
passages whose primary intent is local rather than futuristic. 
Nevertheless, granted the inspiration of Scripture, it is reason-
able to expect that the Father would share news of the coming of 
His Son. The devout student is not disappointed: he finds the his-
torical books rich in types and symbols that realize their further 
raison digtre in the NT recording of the incarnation, life, min-
istry, death, resurrection, ascension, priesthood, return, and 
reign of our Lord. Examples are: the provision of a ram that 
spared Abraham from making a sacrifice of Isaac--Gn 22; Joseph as 
the savior of his people--Gn 42-47; the institution of the Pass-
over, foreshadowing Calvary--Ex 12:1-28; the sanctuary and its 
services--Ex 25-40; the history of Ruth and Boaz as a link in God's 
redemptive chain--Ruth 1-4. He traces the working of God's hand 
in history, sees Him preparing the way for the New Testament era. 
New Testament  
The general hermeneutical principles applied to the historical 
writings of the OT are also valid for similar sections of the NT, 
and should be faithfully employed. In addition, the unique nature 
of the record calls for other special considerations. 
The four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles may be said to 
be a natural outcome, recorded by inspiration, of the experiences 
on which they are based. A few men worked with the most extra-

--- Page 212 ---
202 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
ordinary Person who ever lived among men. They came to believe He 
was God "manifest in the flesh" (1 Ti 3:16), they worshiped Him, 
and felt impelled to share with their fellows the news that the 
Son of God had been with them, had died for their redemption, had 
risen and ascended, and was ministering as High Priest on man's 
behalf. The proclamation spread throughout the Roman world and 
led to the establishment of churches whose members needed, in addi-
tion to verbal reports, written records of the events that had 
given birth to Christianity. That need was met by the writing of 
the Gospels and the Acts. 
Few if any documents have been so carefully analyzed as have 
the Gospels. Every scrap of manuscript purporting to carry any 
part of the four accounts has been minutely and expertly examined 
and the findings incorporated into the total picture of the textual 
criticism of Christian records. The work continues. 
The Adventist attitude toward these documents is one of in-
formed confidence, with recognition that although not all questions 
of origin, dating, and related matters are yet solved, and that 
the Synoptic and fourth Gospels still pose problems, the present 
state of knowledge justifies acceptance of the Gospels as trust-
worthy records of the life and ministry of our Lord. At the same 
time, their limited objective is acknowledged: none of them at-
tempts a full biography of its Subject; each is highly and purpose-
fully selective, choosing from the multitudinous events of a short 
Palestinian life some of the features that illustrate the central 
thesis, that "in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king" 
there was born "a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord" (Mt 2:1; Lk 
2:11). The resultant story reveals One who is "so great that He 
must be real," and that reality declares that "the Word was made 
flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory . . .)" (Jn 
1:14). 
The focal point in the record is the Resurrection of Him who 
undeniably died on a cross. This is to the NT what the Exodus is 
to the OT, but it has fared worse from the pens of the critics (if 
that be possible!) than has its predecessor. We cannot accept the 
theology that reduces the Resurrection to a subjective experience, 
denying the reality of the defeat of death, the empty tomb, the 
risen Lord, the revitalized disciples, the power-filled apostles, 
and the victorious church. Without the Master's literal Resurrec-
tion the NT becomes a record of false hopes, a movement based at 
best on a profound misunderstanding, at the worst on a deceit. We 
see in the separate and apparently even divergent accounts trust-
worthy reports of the central event in salvation history. Yet it 
is not an isolated event, out of character with what goes before 
and after. It is in comfortable harmony with the Incarnation and

--- Page 213 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 203 
the Virgin Birth, with Creation, the Exodus, and all the mighty 
acts of God. It is indeed the supreme miracle, but it has excel-
lent supportive company in the other miracles set forth in both 
testaments. 
Had there been no Resurrection there would have been no Acts 
of the Apostles, for its recital is a testimony to the reality of 
the risen Christ. The book succinctly records the rise of the 
Christian Church as a Resurrection-based phenomenon powered by 
Christ's representative, the Holy Spirit. But it also is selec-
tive: "It is a few acts of a few apostles at a few places during 
a few years."--Bernard Ramm, Special Revelation and the Word of 
God, p. 170. In common with the rest of Scripture, and especially 
with the Gospels, it possesses, in J. B. Phillips' apt phrase 
"the ring of truth" and is largely self-authenticating. 
The NT pentateuch presents its readers with specific reports 
of many miracles--at least 35 in the Gospels, with another 12 in 
Acts, plus innumerable others to which collective references are 
made. These miracles are often seen as obstacles that delay or 
prevent acceptance of the Christian message. There is no doubt 
about their serving as nails from which great weights of skepti-
cism are hung, but this role is neutralized by the greater miracles 
of the Resurrection of Christ and the new birth, which changes a 
sinner into a saint. The God who can effect such wonderful works 
as these has more than enough power to heal lepers, restore sight, 
and feed five thousand people. "With God all things are possible" 
(Mk 10:27). Such ability belongs to Deity by definition. If it 
be not granted, God is no longer seen as the Almighty, and the 
ultimate basis for belief in Scripture is removed. Faith is called 
for, but it is closely associated with verifiable fact, and Chris-
tians can accept the narratives given in the Gospels and Acts in 
quiet confidence, knowing that they are demonstrably reliable. 
Wisdom and Poetry  
For the purposes of this study Job, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes 
are classified as wisdom literature, whereas Psalms, Song of Solo-
mon, and Lamentations are classed as poetry, with each group cross-
ing into the other. Job may be treated as both wisdom and poetry, 
and the poetry of the Psalms contains much that may be called wis-
dom. Examples of each may also be identified in other parts of 
the Bible, making the total field a wide one. But each class con-
forms to acknowledged literary styles common to Semitic writing, 
providing aphoristic ethical wisdom. Proverbs, for instance, 
largely consists of meshalim (plural of Hebrew mashal, "similitude, 
comparison")--"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge"

--- Page 214 ---
204 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
(1:7); "Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; 
for she is thy life" (4:13). Ecclesiastes contains prose, poetry, 
and some Proverb-like utterances--"To every thing there is a sea-
son, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" (3:1); "Better 
is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king" (4:13). 
Job is generally accepted as drama cast (apart from its prologue, 
chaps. 1 and 2, and epilogue, 42:7-17) as dialogue in poetical 
form--"And Job spake, and said, Let the day perish wherein I was 
born. . . . Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, . . . 
who ever perished, being innocent?" (3:2, 3; 4:1, 7). 
Wisdom and poetry call for a different hermeneutical approach 
from that used for history. History brings information and teaches 
by illustration, recording God's ways with man and man's response 
to divine guidance and commandments. The nature of wisdom and 
poetic literature leaves room for a freer concept of inspiration, 
because such books contain much of man's musing on his everyday 
life ("I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself 
like a green bay tree" [Ps 37:35]; "I acknowledge my transgressions: 
and my sin is ever before me" [51:3]), and are not restricted to 
his thoughts about God. They display the human element in pure 
religion ("There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the 
end thereof are the ways of death" [Pr 16:25]; "Whatsoever thy 
hand findeth to do, do it with thy might" [Ec 9:10]). They also 
represent religion's marriage with morality ("Whoso committeth 
adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it de-
stroyeth his own soul" [Pr 6:32]). Nevertheless, they, as Scrip-
ture, also come under the Spirit's guidance. His influence en-
sures the high quality of spiritual benefits to be derived from 
the wisdom books. A thoughtful study of the Psalms can but impress 
the reader with a sense of wonder that such lofty concepts of God 
were attained in so barbaric an age as that in which the several 
authors composed their poems. (See Ps 103:13, 14; 139:24.) 
The most prominent metrical feature of Hebrew poetry is par-
allelism, a stylistic device usually consisting of a couplet in 
which the thought expressed in the first line is reproduced in the 
second by a parallel but differing form. A simple and well-known 
example is found in Ps 119:105: 
"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, 
and a light unto my path." 
Three generally recognized primary forms of parallelism occur 
frequently in the Bible, and are illustrated here: 
Synonymous parallelism:

--- Page 215 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 205 
	
"Reuben, thou art my firstborn, 	 • 
my might, and the beginning of my strength" (Gn 49:3). 
Antithetical or contrasted parallelism: 
"The king's favour is toward a wise servant: 
but his wrath is against him that causeth shame" (Pr 14:35). 
Synthetic or constructive parallelism: 
"I sought the Lord, and he heard me, 
and delivered me from all my fears" (Ps 34:4). 
In addition, there are secondary forms of parallelism (emblem-
atic, climactic, and introverted) with variations on all forms men-
tioned here. The student is referred to chap. 10, pp. 179, 180 and 
for a fuller study of the subject to the SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 
3, pp. 17-28. The various modes are listed here because of their 
effect on interpretation. If parallelism is ignored, it can lead 
to some untenable interpretations. When its presence is recognized, 
the writer's intention can be correctly determined. 
Few books in the Bible have been the subject of so many inter-
pretations as has the Song of Solomon. Some regard the book as an 
Oriental love poem or a collection of love lyrics that tell of 
Solomon's wooing of the Shulamite. Others see it as a poetical 
record of the Shulamite's rejection of the king's advances in 
loyalty to her shepherd lover. The traditional rabbinical view, 
which is still held by some interpreters, treats the Song as an 
allegory that portrays the Lord's love for Israel. This has been 
Christianized by those who see the book as a depiction of Christ's 
love for His church. The most useful hermeneutic is probably that 
which combines the secular and the sacred so that the love element 
is eventually transmuted into an inspired illustration of the 
Saviour's love for His bride, the church. 
The Bible student will do well to utilize the practical nature 
of the wisdom and poetical books rather than to impose rigid theo-
logical uses upon them. When abused, these books can lead astray: 
when rightly studied, they yield rich rewards by impressing life's 
lessons upon the student, increasing his knowledge of the way 
divine planning works, elevating his understanding of God's char-
acter, and quickening his spiritual perceptions. 
Conclusion  
The foregoing comments on the triple subject of this chapter 
have sought to emphasize that each of these three sections forms

--- Page 216 ---
206 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
an essential part of the total corpus of Scripture and has bene-
fited from the same creative inspiration as other portions of the 
Bible have. Although aware of higher critical attitudes, we can-
not accept them, for we find the sections studied conducive to 
belief, harmonizing with the companion books of the Bible, forming 
part of God's overall plan of revelation, indispensably contribut-
ing to the total disclosure. We find the same God speaking through-
out, guiding men into all truth toward one faith and one Lord. We 
recognize, however, that the hermeneutic task is never done. It 
has explored a few mountain ranges of Scriptural thought: vast 
undeveloped territories await our occupation. 
But the final word must be neither technical nor professional; 
it must be devotional, spiritual, transcending the formalities of 
scholarship, opening the reader's eye to the wonders of God's ways 
with man, and to the demands made on Deity by man's ways with God. 
The Word has a continual homiletic purpose, even when handling 
formal history (see 1 Cor 10:11). It tries to share with men its 
own eternal outlook, but does so only through the intermediary 
work of the Spirit. Part of its uniqueness resides in the neces-
sity of enlisting the Spirit's aid for arrival at a correct herme-
neutic. The simplest historical event, the most conventional 
piece of wisdom, or the most modest of poetic flights can be mis-
interpreted without the inner directives that issue from the Holy 
Spirit's ministry in the mind of the reader. A spiritual partner-
ship such as this will subject the student to Scripture's over-
riding objective, making him "wise unto salvation" (2 Ti 3:15). 
READING LIST  
Anderson, Bernhard W. Understanding the Old Testament. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1957. 
A study of OT history, setting it in a clear though crit- 
ical outline, and enabling the reader to see it as a whole 
while still referring to sections of particular interest. 
Blackman, E. C. Biblical Interpretation. Philadelphia: West-
minster Press, 1957. 
A concentrated guide to biblical hermeneutics that dis-
tills the essence of the subject. Well written against a 
background of wide culture. Adventists will not subscribe to 
all its teaching but will find its contents generally help-
ful. 
Bruce, F. F. The Acts of the Apostles. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. 
Eerdmans, 1951. 
This commentary is essentially for the student of the

--- Page 217 ---
Biblical History, Wisdom, and Poetry 	 207 
Greek text. The book will help in a close study of the Scrip-
ture under the guidance of a devout, well-equipped scholar. 
Dr. Bruce's related works on Luke and the book of Acts are 
also recommended. 
Butterfield, Herbert. Christianity and History. New York: 
Scribner's, 1950. 
A heartening look into history by a Christian scholar. 
History takes on new meaning when viewed in the light of his 
perceptive analysis. 
Harrison, R. K. Introduction to the Old Testament. Grand Rapids: 
Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1969. 
A comprehensive survey of OT studies fairly presenting 
many divergent views on interpretation and theology. A use-
ful reference work for those who can evaluate opposing views. 
Terry, Milton S. Biblical Hermeneutics. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 
no date. 
Although produced in the 19th century, this volume still 
merits attention. Much of its exhaustive survey is still 
valid, especially in reference to particular sections of 
biblical literature. 
World Council of Churches. Biblical Authority for Today. Edited 
by Alan Richardson and W. Schweitzer. Philadelphia: West-
minster Press, 1952. 
A collection of essays covering well the title's promise. 
The several contributors bring a rich variety of interpreta-
tion to light. The standard of writing is high, the poten-
tial benefit to the reader is great.

--- Page 218 ---
Dean emeritus of the Seventh-day 
Adventist Theological Seminary, Dr. 
W. G. C. Murdoch is professor of sys-
tematic theology and chairman of the 
department of church and ministry. His 
dissertation for the Ph.D. degree in 
1946 from the University of Birmingham, 
England, was entitled: "Tertullian as a 
Montanist." The Medallion of Merit 
Award, highest educational award in 
the Adventist Church, was presented 
to Dr. Murdoch in 1972 for his con-
tribution to "the education of the 
Adventist ministry."

--- Page 219 ---
12. Interpretation of Symbols, 
Types, Allegories, and Parables  
W. G. C. MURDOCH 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
The general principles of biblical interpretation presented 
in chapter 10 have special applications in the various categories 
of biblical literature. Among these categories are symbols, types, 
allegories, and parables, which are the subject matter of this 
paper. For the guidance of the reader these categories are first 
defined, then described and illustrated, with guidelines on their 
interpretation following. It should be noted that these four cat-
egories may not be mutually exclusive in all aspects, particularly 
when symbols and types, and allegories and parables, are compared. 
Definitions  
A symbol is a timeless representation of something or someone. 
It pictures a meaning rather than expresses it in spoken or written 
words. Religious symbols point beyond themselves to spiritual 
reality. The value of religious symbols lies in their ability to 
make plain in compressed form great religious truths. They lend 
themselves to the expression of faith, and divine revelation uses 
them to communicate truth. 
A biblical type, by contrast, is like a shadow cast on the 
pages of earlier literature, which presents a limited account of 
a truth, the full embodiment of which is amplified in a later rev-
elation. A type invariably points forward in time to its antitype. 
Types are rooted in history yet are prophetic in nature. Their 
basic ideas lie in their earthly and human correspondence to a 
heavenly and divine reality. Genuine OT types are not concerned 
with unessential similarities between type and antitype (counter-
part). They are realities (persons, events, things) of the OT, 
which later are shown by inspired writers to have a corresponding 
spiritual reality superceding the historical fact. 
An allegory is a rhetorical device that sets forth a hidden

--- Page 220 ---
210 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
meaning not implied in the literal. It is a more extensive form 
of a metaphor. In allegory the historical value of the text is 
not so important. It is the spiritual sense that is emphasized. 
Often in the Scripture there is a point-by-point comparison be-
tween the allegory and the interpretation of it. Allegory reads 
into factual experience a heavenly significance not found in the 
earthly. However, allegory was seldom used by Bible writers. 
A parable is an extended simile. It draws our attention to 
the purpose of God by means of a story of human example. The con-
tents of the parable may be taken from nature, political events, 
or social events. It often is drawn from the surroundings of 
everyday life. The most familiar kind of parable is the story 
that illustrates one idea. 
Symbols  
The word symbol is derived from the Greek verb sumballo, 
meaning "to bring together." It draws together events or truths 
so that they can be grasped in an intelligent way and made into 
a coherent whole. In the Bible symbol is sometimes seen as the 
use of something visible for depicting what is invisible. It is 
a pictorial representation of a religious or theological idea--an 
object that rightly may be given a twofold interpretation. One 
of these is the obvious and natural meaning: the other is the 
veiled and often supernatural. A symbol often involves an object 
presented to convey some lesson. A typical example of a symbol 
in the OT is the rending of King Jeroboam's garment by the prophet 
Ahijah. This rather audacious act was to symbolize that the united 
kingdoms of Israel and Judah would be rent asunder by war and 
strife (see 1 Ki 11:29-31). 
It perhaps should be noted parenthetically that biblical sym-
bolism, as a significant aspect of Seventh-day Adventist interest 
in biblical interpretation, has been seen as pointing to real 
events in time and space. The interest of contemporary theology 
in religious symbolism within a philosophical framework has never 
been a part of Seventh-day Adventist hermeneutic or theology. 
In the area of predictive prophecy, for example, to make the 
predictions of the Second Advent of Jesus Christ into symbolic ref-
erences to a higher level of human achievement rather than refer-
ences to a literal, personal event breaking into history would be 
seen by Seventh-day Adventists as both taking unwarranted liberty 
with the meaning of the language of Scripture and destroying the 
entire mission of the Seventh-day Adventist movement.

--- Page 221 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 211 
Examples of Symbols  
Supernatural. Many supernatural symbols are found in the 
Bible to teach men lessons from God. The flaming sword at the 
garden of Eden was a symbol that man had disobeyed God and could 
no longer have direct communion with his Maker (see Gn 3:24). The 
burning bush portrayed to Moses the holiness of God (see Ex 3:2). 
The pillar of fire by night and the pillar of cloud by day were 
symbols to the children of Israel that God was leading them on 
their journey (see Ex 13:21, 22). Miraculous symbols of nature are 
sometimes employed by God to demonstrate His care for His people. 
Prophets were frequently shown symbols in vision that assisted 
them in portraying God's message to men. Amos saw a basket of sum-
mer fruit, which was God's way of telling him the harvest of sin 
for Israel was ripe (Amos 8). Jeremiah was shown bad and good figs 
to represent two distinct classes of people (see Jer 24). Zech-
ariah's two olive trees providing ample oil to give light indicate 
that God does not leave us in darkness, but light is provided for 
those who trust Him (see Zec 4). 
Sanctuary. There is a richly developed symbolism full of 
spiritual lessons in the Mosaic system. The court surrounding the 
tabernacle enclosed the brazen altar of burnt offering and the 
laver of washing. Here sacrifices were made, and sinners experi-
enced the cleansing power of the blood. Five different offerings 
were made upon the altar. The morning and evening sacrifice was 
a symbol of Christ's continual intercession for the sinner. The 
meat offering acknowledged God's ownership. The peace offering 
recognized Christ as the Prince of Peace. The sin offering sym-
bolized the bearing of sins on the cross, and the trespass offer-
ing showed that Christ has taken care of all acknowledged guilt. 
In the Holy Place the table of showbread was a symbol of 
Christ as the bread of life (see Jn 6:51). The incense ascending 
from the altar assures us that our prayers are heard in heaven 
(see Rev 5:8). The seven branched golden candlestick was emblem-
atic of Him who is the light of the world (see Jn 8:12). The ark 
in the Most Holy Place speaks of the sacred character of God's 
law, and the mercy seat portrays God's mercy being extended to the 
repentant sinner. Over and above all, the holy Shekinah of God's 
presence was manifested between the cherubim, who thus have an 
immediate relation to God. 
New Testament. In the NT the Lord's supper supercedes the 
Passover as a symbol, conveying to us in meaning the broken body 
and shed blood of Jesus Christ. The mode of baptism is a symbol 
of our dying to the old life of sin and rising to walk in the

--- Page 222 ---
212 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
righteousness of Christ's life. Christian communion and Christian 
baptism must be taken seriously by the Christian. In studying the 
emblems of the bread and the wine, the believer understands the 
symbolic significance of the expression "feeding on Christ." 
Apocalyptic. Apocalyptic literature abounds in symbols, and 
the images presented in such writings help us to interpret other 
objects often placed in a future or eschatological setting. There 
are no books of the Bible richer in symbols than the book of Dan-
iel and the Apocalypse of John. In the second chapter of Daniel, 
Nebuchadnezzar sees the world powers as an awe-inspiring human 
statue. But in the seventh chapter the prophet Daniel sees these 
same world empires as cruel ravenous beasts--a lion, a bear, a 
leopard, and a hideous nondescript. Nebuchadnezzar sees these 
earthly kingdoms in majesty, but Daniel sees them reduced to the 
level of beasts. 
Often there is significance attached to the color of the sym-
bol. John presents the four horses at the opening of the four 
seals as distinctive in color (Rev 6:1-8). The white horse pre-
sents the conqueror in all his purity. The red horse speaks of 
war and bloodshed. The black horse depicts famine. The pale 
horse suggests sickness, death, and Hades. The seven vials of 
Rev 15, 16 speak of the total destruction of the wicked. The enemy 
of all good is represented as a scarlet colored beast with seven 
heads and ten horns (Rev 17:3). 
Interpretation of Symbols  
There are biblical expositors who so depreciate the use of 
symbols that they leave them without any theological significance, 
and others may grossly exaggerate their importance, but the strong 
presence of biblical symbols requires that the serious and con-
servative biblical scholar give them more than casual considera-
tion. An effective exemplar of such scholarship is Bernard Ramm, 
who suggests the following rules for the interpretation of biblical 
symbols (Protestant Biblical Interpretation, pp. 214, 215): 
1. Symbols interpreted by the Scriptures themselves provide 
sure ground for all further studies in symbolism. 
2. When symbolism is not interpreted by Scripture, interpre-
tation should be sought by the following method: 
(a) Examine the context thoroughly, for the idea corres-
ponding to the symbol might thus be revealed.

--- Page 223 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 213 
(b) Study other references using the same symbol for 
a clue to its meaning. 
(c) Consider the nature of the symbol for clues to its 
meaning. Take care not to read the expositor's cultural set-
ting into the biblical. 
(d) Compare studies of Semitic and neighboring cultures, 
possibly as revealed by archeology, which may reveal the mean-
ing of a biblical symbol. 
If such investigations do not reveal any clues to symbols un-
interpreted in the text, Ramm advises that "it is wiser to be si-
lent than to speculate." 
3. Let the expositor be aware of possible double imagery in 
symbols, since the same symbol may have more than one meaning. A 
lion, for example, is a symbol of both Christ and Satan. 
Types  
Through the centuries certain expositors have seen no rela-
tionship between the OT and NT and, like Marcion (2d cent.) in the 
early church, have rejected the entire OT. Others, like Origen 
(ca. 250 A.D.), have gone to the opposite extreme and have read 
into the OT unwarranted and fanciful allegorical interpretations. 
To a degree the meaning given to types determines the view 
one places on the OT in relation to the NT. That the NT writers 
used OT types in their exegesis of the Word of God is without 
question. A notable example is found in Rom 5:14, where Paul sets 
forth Adam as a type "of Him that was to come" (tupos tou melion-
tos). 1 Cor 10:11, RSV, cites the experience of the Israelites 
in their wilderness wanderings and affirms, "Now these things hap-
pended to them as a warning [tupikos], but they were written down 
for our instruction, upon whom the end of the ages has come." 
Characteristics of Types  
Types do not partake of the nature of unrealities. They are 
grounded in history. As the uplifted brass serpent saved those 
who looked upon it in faith, so all who with uplifted faith behold 
the Son of God on the cross may receive salvation from the deadly 
effect of sin On 3:14). This OT event is typical of the NT event 
of Christ's death on the cross. Types tend to look forward to 
ultimate realities. They involve a higher application of meaning. 
The earlier events become more significant in the later. The

--- Page 224 ---
214 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
offering of Isaac by Abraham can be considered a type of God's 
offering of His only begotten Son (cf. Heb 11:17-19). 
Types frequently have spiritual meaning for both the times 
when they were given and the future. Especially are the OT types 
important to interpretation of the NT, so that there is great loss 
in attempts to separate the study of the NT from a careful exeget-
ical and theological exposition of the OT. 
Care must be exercised to differentiate between type and pre-
diction. Although a type has reference to the future, it is not 
in itself a prediction. Rather, it is recorded as a historical 
fact without evident reference to the future. The antitype proves 
to be the "body" of which the type was a foreshadowing, and thus 
is a more vital and ultimate reality than the type. 
Types and the Sanctuary Services  
A notable example of a heavenly reality is the heavenly sanc-
tuary. God showed Moses on Mount Sinai a tabenit, or model, and 
asked him to construct a building on earth after the heavenly pat-
tern (Ex 25:9, 10). 
Israel's annual festivals, some of which called the nation 
(particularly the males) to appear at the sanctuary, had both a 
backward and a forward look. There was definite correspondence 
in these types of the coming ministry of Christ as the great High 
Priest, who after having offered Himself as a sacrifice for man's 
sins rose from the dead and ascended to heaven to continue His 
intercession as man's substitute. 
During the Jewish year there were two groups of holy convo-
cations--one in the spring, the other in the fall. In the first 
group the Passover was of outstanding importance, and in the sec-
ond the Day of Atonement was preeminent. The services on these 
occasions are described in detail in Ex 12, Lev 16 and 23. These 
yearly feasts may be summarized as follows: 
1. The Passover (and Feast of Unleavened Bread), to which 
all males were called, was a type of the death of Christ (see Lev 
23:4-8; cf. 1 Cor 5:7, 9). 
2. The Feast of First Fruits, or Feast of Weeks, to which 
all males were called, was a presentation before the Lord of the 
first ripe sheaf, and met its antitype in Christ's resurrection 
and ascension to His Father (Lev 23:9-14; cf. 1 Cor 15:20).

--- Page 225 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 215 
3. The Day of Pentecost, closely related to the Feast of 
First Fruits, found its first and partial typical counterpart in 
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the early church on that very 
day (Lev 23:15-21; cf. Acts 2:1-4). 
These three feasts observed in the first months of the Jewish 
year represented important events in the ministry of Christ. The 
remaining special days were observed in the seventh month. 
4. The Feast of Trumpets, the sounding of an alarm in view 
of the approaching Day of Atonement, represented the sounding of 
a similar alarm preceding the antitypical work of judgment led by 
Christ (Lev 23:23, 24; cf. Rev 14:6, 7). 
5. The Day of Atonement, or the cleansing of the sanctuary, 
represented the concluding work of Christ in the heavenly sanctu-
ary (Lev 23:26-32; Dan 8:13, 14; cf. epistle to the Hebrews). 
6. The Feast of Tabernacles, or Harvest Ingathering, to 
which all males were called, represented the final harvest and 
the ingathering of God's people at the Second Advent of Christ 
(Lev 23:33-44; cf. Matt. 13:39). 
To these might be added the observance of the year of jubilee 
referred to in Lev 25, which represented the restoration of God's 
people in the new earth (Is 65:17-25). 
Although these festivals were repeated year by year, they are 
not to be considered as cyclical in their meaning. As Von Rad 
comments in his essay on OT hermeneutics, "the components of every 
Old Testament witness, so inalienably historical in character, do 
not at all permit a consistently developed notion of a repetition. 
Indeed, one must see the basic ideas of typology less in the 
notion of 'repetition' than in that of 'correspondence."--C. Wes-
termann, ed., Essays in Old Testament Hermeneutics, p. 20. 
Literal Israel a Type of Spiritual Israel  
Israel was God's chosen people in the OT era. They were 
called to do a special work, but failed their commission. In the 
NT God called another people, who were free from ethnic restric-
tions. Their faith and commitment centered in Christ. The OT 
promises are now fulfilled to them who are Jews inwardly (see Rom 
2:29). The commission to take the gospel to all the world will 
be fulfilled by them. The church (spiritual Israel) consists now 
of those who will proclaim Heaven's last message of mercy to the 
world.

--- Page 226 ---
216 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Types and the Messiah  
We see a Christ-centered ideology in the OT in the many Mes-
sianic types that prefigure the Son of God coming to earth. He 
was to come from the seed of David according to the flesh. David, 
the brilliant king of Israel, was a type of the greater Davidic 
King who was to come. Ps 69 portrays the suffering of the psalm-
ist, but his suffering was but a shadow of the suffering that 
Christ was to endure. Heb 3:1-6 depicts Moses as the leader and 
mediator of Israel, but a greater than Moses came as Redeemer of 
all mankind. 
Jonah's miraculous deliverance from death (Mt 12:39-41; Lk 
11:29, 30) typifies the resurrection of Christ. The "imprisonment" 
of both for a parallel length of time is significant. 
Exegesis of Types as Method 
In employing typology in biblical interpretation, we must be 
careful to note how the OT type is employed by the NT writers. 
Not every OT type, however, meets its complete counterpart in the 
NT. There often remains a further eschatological significance 
that, being the ultimate, is extremely important for the modern 
interpreter. Here the temptation for the interpreter to go beyond 
sober exegesis and present a fanciful exposition must be resisted. 
Typology can be legitimately used in interpretation of the 
OT to bring out the correspondence between God's methods of deal-
ing with His people before and after the cross of Christ--thus 
showing that His over-all plan of salvation is one. 
Criteria for Interpretation of Types  
There are certain criteria that are necessary to sound inter-
pretation of types: 
1. The specific points of correspondence must be carefully 
noted between the types and the antitypes. 
2. The points of difference and contrast between the types 
and the antitypes should also be noted. 
3. The points of correspondence and difference should be 
studied in the light of the historical context of each. 
4. An attempt must not be made to discover meaning in the

--- Page 227 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 217 
minutia of detail. Here the NT is a guide as it treats the broad 
themes of the plan of redemption rather than the incidentals of 
the type. 
5. Sound typology must rest on the guidance of inspired 
writers. When the interpreter moves out of the areas designated 
by inspiration to be types, he needs to acknowledge that he is 
moving into the realm of speculation. 
6. The interpreter should seek understanding of God's pur-
pose in giving both the type and the antitype. There should be 
an evident similarity of meaning between them, although the latter 
usually represents a more vital and broader event or principle 
than the former. 
A genuine application of typology contributes much to the 
understanding of the Bible by adding to the vertical of revelation 
the horizontal of salvation. 
Typology Versus Allegorism 
A distinction must be made between typology and allegorism, 
which conceives of the Scriptures as a book composed mainly of 
riddles or secret puzzles to be solved. The commentator tries to 
find the right clues to hidden meanings. This kind of interpreta-
tion differs radically from the sober kind of typology, which has 
its foundation in historical events, persons, institutions, and 
actions. 
The idea of an earthly counterpart of a heavenly reality is 
plainly set forth in the OT. To expound the NT in this light is 
true typology, and it takes away the unreality and artificiality 
that is characteristic of the allegorical. To set the typical in 
the framework of the antitypical is not allegorizing but sober 
typology. 
One aim of allegorists was to establish Judaism as an intel-
lectually respectable faith in a sophisticated pagan milieu. Thus 
they would interpret anthropomorphic biblical references allegor-
ically. Philo, Origen, Augustine, and Jerome freely indulged in 
allegorical interpretation of Scripture, whereas Luther, Melanch-
thon, and Calvin maintained that this method was too subjective. 
An example of the elaborate fantasies of some of the alle-
gorical interpreters is found in a sermon among the Spuria of 
Chrysostom on "The Massacre of the Innocents." The writer states 
that because the children of two years and under were murdered by

--- Page 228 ---
218 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Herod while those of three years escaped, those who hold the Trin-
itarian view of the Godhead will be saved, but Binitarians and 
Unitarians will be lost. 
Allegory 
A distinction must be made between allegory and allegorism. 
Allegory is a legitimate category of literature, whereas allegor-
ism is a rather free method of interpretation. There is also a 
distinction between the allegory and the type as categories of 
literature. The type is rooted in the literal and historical, 
whereas allegory creates an imaginative event rather than being 
bound by the literal. 
The Bible writers sometimes employed allegory to illustrate 
God's dealings with His people. An example of this in the OT is 
found in Ps 80, where Israel is likened to a vine from Egypt. 
This tender shoot was transplanted and took root in the Promised 
Land. This illustrates how God brought His people out of Egyp-
tian bondage and took them to the land of Palestine, where they 
prospered and multiplied. 
Christ uses a similar allegory of the vine and its branches 
On 15:5). He desired to show His followers how dependent they 
were on His Father (the Gardener) and Himself (the Vine) for their 
spiritual sustenance and development. 
Paul pointed to an allegory to illustrate the difference be-
tween the old and new covenants (Gal 4:21-31). He made the sep-
aration of Hagar and Ishmael from Sarah and Isaac illustrate the 
freedom Christians have in Christ's grace in contrast to the bond-
age of trying to earn salvation by works. Isaac was the child of 
faith; Ishmael the son of works. As with them, there is always a 
conflict between faith and works. Faith is free, works bring 
bondage (see also 1 Cor 5:6-8; 9:8-10; 10:1-11). 
In attempting to interpret an allegory we should always bear 
in mind the original hearers, the author's reason for using the 
device, and the basic points of comparison stressed by him. Rec-
ognition of the messages for the original and present readers is 
vital to the interpreter.

--- Page 229 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 219 
Parables  
Definition and Example  
The word parable is from the Greek parabola, which literally 
means "a placing alongside of," thus signifying a comparison or 
an illustration. A parable is an extended simile that employs an 
ordinary circumstance in everyday life to illustrate a religious 
truth. Jesus used this method on many occasions. Some of His 
most profound lessons were expressed in parabolic language. His 
parables vary from the brief paradoxical saying such as Mk 3:23 
to the sustained comparison of the prodigal son in Lk 15:11-32. 
Parables are not confined to the NT. The poets and prophets 
of the OT often presented their messages in parables. They could 
take the form of a story, as in Ez 17:2-10; an acted-out lesson, 
such as the seething pot in.Ez 24:3-14; a popular proverb as in 
1 Sa 10:12, or some dark saying calculated to escape the super-
ficial observer, as in Ps 78:2. 
It is difficult to arrange Christ's parables according to 
type, as they touch so many phases of life. These lessons are 
drawn from the field and show Jesus' interest in agriculture. He 
spoke of the sower and the soil, seedtime and harvest, wheat and 
tares. Many of His parables center in family life--the householder, 
the ten bridesmaids, the marriage feast, and the two sons. Other 
parables are taken from the business world, such as the two debt-
ors, the daily workers, the costly pearl, and how to make wise 
investments. 
Purpose of Parables  
The purpose of the parable is to teach by comparison, analogy, 
and illustration. Jesus, the master teacher, employed this method 
with great success. He used parables to expound deep spiritual 
truths. He told true-to-life stories to make clear to His hearers 
the true meaning of life. These brought out lessons that explained 
the mysteries of His kingdom. Jesus was not concerned with pro-
pounding problems. The primary function of His parable was to get 
a commitment from His hearers to a new life experience. He had 
come to earth to set up a new kingdom, and He was inviting His 
hearers into this kingdom. This is why many of His parables are 
an exposition of the virtues of the kingdom of heaven. He was 
eager to reveal rather than conceal the mystery of this kingdom. 
Although His parables seemed clear and convincing to many

--- Page 230 ---
220 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
who heard them, there were some to whom His teaching was obscure. 
These were spectators more often than followers; they heard but 
did not understand. Although generally those who were willing 
to commit their lives to God could grasp the meaning of the para-
bles, there were occasions when even the disciples asked for in-
terpretation (see Mt 13:36). Men's minds were darkened because 
they either willfully refused to listen with open minds to the 
Master's messages of salvation or they distorted His message by 
their preconceptions. 
Repeatedly Jesus would preface a parable with the words "The 
kingdom of heaven is like---" He taught the establishment of that 
kingdom and the judgment that would precede it. His kingdom will 
be composed of subjects who already have accepted the kingdom of 
grace in their hearts. The kingdom in its eschatological setting 
will culminate when Christ becomes victor over every opposing 
power. The parables illustrate the final and victorious power of 
Christ and His future reign over all the world. 
Interpreting Parables  
There are certain principles necessary to guide us in the 
interpretation of parables: 
1. A parable often has one main point and one main message 
that it was designed to convey. Injustice is done many times to 
the interpretation of the parable when we introduce minutia ex-
traneous to the central message of the illustration. 
2. The parable should be examined with a view to reconstruct-
ing the circumstances that called it forth. Was the parable in 
answer to a question? If so, what was the nature of the question? 
Who were present when the parable was given? 
3. The parable must be understood in terms of the historic 
background--the manners, customs, symbolism, and culture of the 
people. If the parable deals with farming, for example, we must 
understand the farming of its time before we can fully understand 
the parable. In considering the historical backdrop of the par-
able, the OT and its terminology must not be neglected, for it 
formed a real part of the lives of the people to whom the parable 
was spoken. 
4. Parables must be studied in their context to determine 
whether the meaning of the parable has been given. 
5. If a parable is used to mold doctrinal thinking, we must

--- Page 231 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 221 
be certain that our interpretation of the parable is grounded 
strictly in that given by inspired writers. 
Take, for example, the often misunderstood and misinterpreted 
parable of the rich man and Lazarus. This story is frequently 
cited to prove the popular concept of the innate immortality of 
the soul and to give us a glimpse into the future life. In this 
interpretation the souls of the good are supposed to have passed 
on to eternal bliss whereas those of the wicked have entered into 
endless punishment. If this portrayal is literal, the gulf be-
tween heaven and hell is too wide for persons to cross over but 
narrow enough to allow them to converse. Rather, Jesus was here 
using an argument that His hearers believed, but to which He did 
not subscribe. 
The contemporary Jewish concept pictured "Abraham's bosom" 
as a place of joy where the righteous go at death. Josephus in 
his "Discourse to the Greeks Concerning Hades" parallels closely 
the narrative of the rich man and Lazarus. Here we read of the 
righteous being within sight and speaking distance of the chamber 
where the wicked are tormented. 
The lesson taught in this parable is not whether the wicked 
go to Hades at death or the righteous to Abraham's bosom, but that 
in this present life we have our only opportunity to make prepar-
ation for the future. There will be no second chance for any 
individual after death. It depends on our decision here whether 
we will receive immortality at the second coming of Christ or 
suffer annihilation. 
One of the most universally appealing parables is found in 
Lk 15. It is called the parable of the prodigal son. A better 
title, however, would be the parable of the pardoning father. The 
father did not treat the son as he deserved. He was so pleased to 
see him come back that he freely forgave him all his wrong and re-
instated him to sonship. He even made a great feast to celebrate 
the wayward boy's return. 
The lesson of this parable is clear. When the sinner for-
sakes his sin and returns to God, his pardon is assured. His sin 
is forgiven and he is treated as a son of God, and God looks upon 
him as though he had never sinned. 
A postscript to this parable is the character of the elder 
brother. He represents self-righteous, bigoted, and unforgiving 
hypocrites who feel no need of a Saviour. The parable ends with 
the penitent sinner inside the father's house but the self-
centered, pious Pharisee outside. The father does not forsake

--- Page 232 ---
222 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the elder son. He goes outside to him and pleads with him to 
come in to the feast. 
In general, the parables illustrate how a loving heavenly 
Father treats His earthbound children. He is patient, kind, and 
forgiving, and continues to plead with them to accept the provi-
sion He has made for their salvation. 
Conclusion  
This brief presentation of four of the special categories of 
biblical literature has served to indicate the usefulness of cat-
egorizing as a guide to the biblical interpreter. With this in 
mind the reader may wish to compare this chapter with those deal-
ing with general principles, prophecy and apocalyptic, and bibli-
cal history, wisdom, and poetry. 
READING LIST  
Anderson, Bernhard W. The Old Testament and Christian Faith. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1963. 
A composite volume. Some of the contributors are 
Emil Brunner, Rudolf Bultmann, Oscar Cullman, John Dillen-
berger, John. L. McKenzie, Alan Richardson, Wilhelm Vischer, 
Claus Westermann, and G. Ernest Wright. 
Brownlee, William H. "The Meaning for Old Testament Interpreta-
tion." The Meaning of the Qumran Scrolls for the Bible. 
(Chap. 4, pp. 62-109). New York: Oxford University Press, 
1964. 
Cope, Gilbert Frederick. Symbolism in the Bible and the Church. 
London: S C M Press, c1959. 
A historical treatment of biblical symbols. Use of 
symbols in worship. Psychological types are discussed. 
Dillistone, F. W. Christianity and Symbolism. Philadelphia: 
Westminster Press, 1955. 
A sequel to an earlier work, The Structure of the 
Divine Society. Trends of the Church and of the Sacraments 
as they have come to be formulated within the Christian 
tradition. 
France, R. T. Jesus and the Old Testament. Downer's Grove, Ill.: 
Inter-Varsity Press, 1971.

--- Page 233 ---
Symbols, Types, Allegories, and Parables 	 223 
This book is a revised form of the author's Ph.D. 
thesis. He shows how crucial Jesus' OT interpretation was 
to his understanding of Christ's central place in the his-
tory of salvation and the accomplishment of God's purpose•. 
Goppelt, Leonhard. "Tupos." Theological Dictionary of the New 
Testament. 8 vols. Edited by Gerhard Friedrich. Vol. 8 
(pp. 246-259). Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1972. 
Johnson, Frederick Ernest. Religious Symbolism. New York: Har-
per and Bros., 1955. 
Includes such authors as Cyril Richardson, Daniel Flem-
ing, Abraham Heschel, Paul Tillich, and Nathan A. Scott, Jr. 
Trends of religious symbolism in contemporary literature. 
Lampe, G. W. H., and Woolcombe, K. J. Essays on Typology. Lon-
don: S C M Press, 1957. 
This is a small volume of some seventy-five pages, but 
it is indispensable for a study of typology. It appeared 
as volume 22 in the series "Studies in Theology." These 
essays originated in a conference of the Society for the 
Study of Theology held at Oxford in the spring of 1955. 
Ramm, Bernard. Protestant Biblical Interpretation. Boston: W. 
A. Wilde Co., 1956. 
A textbook of hermeneutics for conservative Protestants. 
Complete revised edition. 
Westermann, C., ed. Essays on Old Testament Hermeneutics. Rich-
mond, Va.: J. Knox Press, 1963. 
Chapter One: "Typological Interpretation of the Old 
Testament," by Gerhard von Rad, pp. 17-39. Chapter Eleven: 
"Is Typological Exegesis an Appropriate Method?" by Walther 
Eichrodt, pp. 224-254.

--- Page 234 ---
After 14 years of ministry for the 
Seventh-day Adventist Church in Hol-
land, Dr. Hans K. LaRondelle joined 
the Seventh-day Adventist Theological 
Seminary faculty in 1967 and is now 
assistant professor of theology. He 
was granted the Th.D. degree in sys-
tematic theology by the Free University 
of Amsterdam in 1971, and he wrote his 
dissertation in the subject area of 
perfection and perfectionism.

--- Page 235 ---
13. Interpretation of Prophetic  
and Apocalyptic Eschatology  
HANS K. LA RONDELLE 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
The Adventist Self-understanding 
The Seventh-day Adventist Church is motivated by its self-
understanding of being primarily a movement in fulfillment of bib-
lical prophecies and arising at the providential time for reforma-
tion and revival to prepare a people for the second advent of 
Christ Jesus. This sense of mission was born out of the critical 
religious disappointment of the Millerite movement in North America 
in A.D. 1844, countered by the continuing study of the apocalyptic 
books--Daniel in the OT and Revelation in the NT. 
Seventh-day Adventists believe that their divine credentials 
as the "remnant church" are found especially in the promise of the 
coming of Elijah before the terrible judgment day in Mal 4 and in 
the call of the three angels' messages of Rev 14 for revival of 
true worship of the Creator and readiness for the judgment day. 
This eschatological and apocalyptic awareness is reflected in the 
fact that close to half of their statements of fundamental beliefs 
are based on apocalyptic prophecies (see the Yearbook). 
Relation to Early Protestantism 
Seen in religious-historical perspective, the Adventist Bible 
interpretation agrees fundamentally with the sola scriptura prin-
ciple of the sixteenth-century Reformation in Europe, i.e., the 
Bible is its own expositor (see L. E. Froom, Movement of Destiny 
[1971], chap. 5). In harmony with the Reformation interpretation 
again, Seventh-day Adventists confess that the unifying theme of 
the OT and the NT is Jesus Christ and the redemption that centers 
in Him. The distinction between Adventist and early Reformation 
theology does not lie in the field of soteriology (the way of sal-
vation) so much as it does in the field of eschatology, especially 
that which focuses on the second advent of Christ.

--- Page 236 ---
226 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The writer of this chapter is aware of the considerable 
revival of theological interest in apocalyptic but wishes to be 
understood as not reviewing that interest here nor of standing 
within its boundaries. He sees the Seventh-day Adventist continua-
tion of the largely Protestant and historicist interpretation of 
Bible prophecy as making an inevitable distinction from the general 
position, as will be evident in the definitions of eschatology and 
apocalyptic here adopted. 
This chapter uses the term eschatology for the fulfillment 
of OT prophecies ranging from the first advent of Christ to the 
establishment of God's eternal kingdom. The term apocalyptic or 
apocalyptic eschatology is concentrated on the signs of the times 
leading to the second advent of Christ. 
Seventh-day Adventist expositors in their eschatology claim 
to be continuing standard prophetic interpretations of the Chris-
tian Church (see L. E. Froom, Prophetic Faith of Our Fathers, vol. 
4, pp. 1054, 1055). 
Hence Adventist eschatology may be characterized by not merely 
its unique interpretations but also its retention of the standard 
Reformation expositions. 
The continuity is basic, for the "new" is the result of fur-
ther but consistent application of the Christ-centered principles 
of the Reformation, particularly to the apocalyptic prophecies of 
Daniel and the Revelation. Although Protestant churches in gen-
eral gradually abandoned their historic platform on prophecy in 
the 19th and 20th centuries, the Great Second Advent Movement came 
from and resulted in a revival of prophetic interpretation and a 
resumption prophetically of the arrested Reformation of the 16th 
and 17th centuries (see SBA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, p. 76). 
Consistency in Christocentric  
Prophetic Interpretation  
This writer sees the Seventh-day Adventist prophetic inter-
pretation as following the general principle of scriptural inter-
pretation that honors the context of the entire Bible, not merely 
the immediate context. This is evident from standard works pub-
lished during the past twenty years. The deeper dimension of the 
literal sense of the Bible can be discerned only when the dynamic 
interrelationship of the OT and the NT is fully honored (see chap. 
10 of this book, "General Principles of Interpretation"). 
The NT often reveals that not all prophecies in the OT

--- Page 237 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 227 
concerning Israel and her enemies--such as Babylon, Edom, and 
Egypt--have found their final fulfillment. This does not mean, 
however, that the class of fulfilled prophecies is irrelevant for 
the Christian Church. The NT frequently intimates a typological 
relationship between the experiences of Israel as the ancient-
covenant people and those of the church of Christ as the new-
covenant people (see Gal 4:21-31; Heb 12:18-24; 1 Pe 2:9, 10). 
This correspondence of OT and NT promises and warnings finds its 
fundamental unity in the God of the covenant, who spoke through 
the OT prophets and then through Jesus Christ (Heb 1:1, 2; 2 Cor 
1:19, 20; Rom 15:8, 9). 
The name Israel was given by God to Jacob as representative 
of a God-centered life, of a guilt-ridden soul that seeks and finds 
God's favor of forgiving grace by a confiding trust in His promises 
(Gn 32; Hos 12; cf. PP, 195-203). This first spiritual use of the 
name Israel indicates the divine, and therefore deeper, meaning of 
the name, which conditions full participation in the blessings 
promised to Jacob and his literal descendants. Moses and the proph-
ets continually stress the conditional factor in the alternative 
of promised blessings to an Israel that walks in the fear of the 
Lord and covenant curses on a disobedient Israel (Dt 27-30; Lev 26; 
Is 1; Mic 6; Jer 7). 
Under the unique character of God's gracious covenant with 
Israel His promises were made conditional on true obedience for 
their complete fulfillment (Ex 19:1-6; Jer 18:5-10). Loving 
obedience to the covenant of the Lord also was a gracious gift of 
God Himself through the Holy Spirit (Dt 30:6; Eze 36:26-28; Jer 
31:31-33). 
It is essential to consider the exact time and place of the 
various covenant promises and curses in the historical development 
of Israel in order to establish the specific fulfillments in and 
after the Assyrian-Babylonian exile, as well as those aspects not 
then fulfilled due to failure to meet the divine conditions. What 
is of crucial importance, however, is to recognize the witness of 
the apostles of Jesus Christ that many OT promises of restoration 
of Israel and of their gathering out of exile to Mount Zion have 
found (and therefore are finding) their fulfillment in Christ and 
His church since Pentecost, which is made up of both Christ-
believing Jews and Gentiles (compare Acts 15:13-18 and Amos 9:11, 
12; 1 Pe 2:9 and Ex 19:5, 6; Heb 8:8-12 and Jer 31:31-33). 
The OT covenant promises are not automatically fulfilled in 
the Church. She too is warned to take heed lest she form illicit 
relations with the world's powers. The sacraments are no guarantee 
against apostasy (1 Cor 10:1-11). On the contrary, indubitable

--- Page 238 ---
228 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
predictions point to apostasy that would come within the church 
and also to a final conflict between heaven and earth, centered 
on Christ and His people (e.g. Acts 20:29, 30; 2 Pe 2:1-3; 2 Th 2; 
Rev 17). The NT envisions final restoration of the church of 
Christ, made up of both Jews and Gentiles, in preparation for the 
second advent of the Lord Jesus (see Rev 12:17; 14:6-12). At 
Christ's second coming many of the OT promises of Israel's restora-
tion will find glorious final fulfillment in the visible gathering 
of the saints to the returning Christ "in the clouds, to meet the 
Lord in the air" (1 Th 4:17; cf. Mt 24:30, 31). Then the elect 
will receive the inheritance of a homeland and a city, whose 
builder and maker is God (Heb 11:10, 13-16, 39, 40; Rev 21, 22). 
The consistent Christological interpretation of the OT in and 
by the NT has far-reaching hermeneutical implications for escha-
tology. Like an ellipse with its two foci, the two advents of 
Christ constitute the double focus of the eschatology of the NT. 
Christ and His covenant people of all the ages are the norm for 
the final fulfillment of the covenant promises and curses (Mt 7: 
21-23; 25:31-46). 
Recognizing the progressive fulfillment in redemptive history, 
the Adventist hermeneutic seems to acknowledge a multiple fulfill-
ment of the broad terms of God's ancient and conditional covenant 
promises to restore Israel and gather them out of the dispersion 
among the nations when they worship Him in Spirit and truth (Dt 
30:1-10; Is 11:11-16; Amos 9:11-15; Jer 31:10): 
1. Some initial fulfillments to the faithfully returning 
Israelites when the Babylonian captivity ended with the historic 
decree of Cyrus, king of Persia, in 537 B.C. (Ezr 1:1-4). 
2. A NT fulfillment not limited to ethnic origins or 
geographical locations with regard to Jews and Gentiles who are 
gathered to Christ and His church through the gospel preaching 
since the day of Pentecost. 
3. A climax in the universal gathering into the kingdom of 
God of all believers in Christ from all time and from all ends of 
the earth at His glorious second appearing, regardless of ethnic 
origin. 
This writer's understanding is that this threefold Christo-
centric application of God's covenant with Israel of old consti-
tutes the underlying hermeneutical foundation of the seven volumes 
of the Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commentary (see vol. 4, pp. 
25-38; vol. 3, p. 887, and on Is 43:5; Joel 3:2; and Amos 9:11, 15), 
the five books of the Conflict of the Ages Series of Ellen G. White

--- Page 239 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 229 
(see PK, pp. 703-721; 374, 375. DA, p. 106 [on Jer 31:31-37]), 
and Questions on Doctrine, pp. 205-243. 
It is significant that neither Christ nor the NT writers apply 
the restricted territorial promises of Jerusalem and Palestine to 
the church of Christ, the faithful remnant of Israel (Rom 11:5). 
This is consistent with what might be called the Christological 
interpretation of the Israel of God as a spiritual nation (1 Pe 
2:9). The NT covenant people are united as a people solely by the 
bonds of faith and baptism into Christ (Gal 3:26-29). They are 
the outworking of Jesus' plan for Jews and Gentiles: "So there 
shall be one flock, one shepherd" (Jn 10:16b, RSV). The Christo-
logical qualification of the name Israel has superseded all former 
religious-national boundaries and ethnic limitations (Eph 2:14-16). 
This has inevitable repercussions on the traditional territorial 
promises regarding the Middle East. Rather than being made void, 
however, these territorial covenant promises are extended world-
wide (Mt 5:5; Rom 4:13), so that the old limited boundaries and 
restrictions are eliminated, in harmony with the Christological 
meaning of the terms embracing Israel and Judah. From this point 
of view, since the cross of Christ and Pentecost, there is theo-
logically no longer a holy land, city, or mountain on earth (Jn 
4:21; Mt 23:38). 
Instead of being invalidated for spiritual Israel, the OT 
terminology and imagery are maintained in the NT with the new, 
universal Christological unfolding (Gal 3:29). The author of the 
book of Hebrews not only applies to the Christian Church the new-
covenant promises made to ancient Israel and Judah (Jer 31:31-33; 
Heb 8) but also pictures her coming to Christ as a coming to Mount 
Zion and to the city of the living God (Heb 12:22). The author 
does not intend to spiritualize away the OT territorial promises. 
He realizes that the OT believers "all died in faith, not having 
received what was promised" (Heb 11:13a, RSV). He explains that 
these believers were not looking for some Middle East country as 
the site for the final fulfillment of the promise. 
If they had been thinking of that land from which 
they had gone out, they would have had opportunity to 
return. But as it is, they desire a better country, that 
is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be 
called their God, for he has prepared for them a city 
(Heb 11:15, 16, 39, 40; cf. vs. 10, RSV). 
The apostle Peter also points to this universal fulfillment of the 
old territorial promise: 
But according to his promise we wait for new heavens

--- Page 240 ---
230 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
and a new earth in which righteousness dwells (2 Pe 3: 
13, RSV). 
The apocalypse shows how John saw a new heaven and a new 
earth, with "the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of 
heaven from God" (Rev 21:2, RSV), which is the end-time fulfill-
ment of all the covenant promises of God to Abraham and Israel. 
The twelve apostles and the twelve tribes of Israel are integrated 
into one covenant people in one city, in one world (Rev 21:12-14). 
Only then will the OT covenant promises be fulfilled com-
pletely, for God's plan of redemption is "a plan for the fullness 
of time, to unite all things in him [Christ], things in heaven and 
things on earth" (Eph 1:10, RSV). The NT shows how crucial to 
one's theology is a consistent Christocentric interpretation of 
the OT prophecies. 
The Christocentric principle of interpretation testifies to 
the underlying gospel truth that the OT and the NT constitute a 
spiritual unity in Christ, and that both testaments shed light on 
each other, the OT being the appointed key to unlock the doors of 
the NT and the NT unfolding the mysteries of the OT. 
End-Time Eschatology 
Accepting the boundaries of the biblical canon as the sole 
normative authority for theology, we do not consider here the 
many extracanonical Jewish apocalyptic writings. The realm of OT 
apocalyptic is concentrated specifically in the book of Daniel. 
Yet particular sections in the prophetic books may also be counted 
apocalyptic, such as Is 24-27 ("the Isaiah apocalypse"); Eze 38, 
39; Joel 2, 3; Zec 12 and 14; Jer 25:15-38, and other similar 
portions. Many Psalms likewise possess a definite apocalyptic-
eschatological dimension, having a special relevancy for the 
church of Christ to the end of time. (See Ps 2, 11, 18, 20, 46, 
91.) 
In the NT, Jesus' Olivet discourse in Mk 13 (par. Mt 24; Lk 
21), and Paul's treatise in 2 Th 2 may be considered apocalyptic, 
together with the apocalypse of John. 
Among the many attempts to spell out the unique characteris-
tics of apocalyptic literature is that of David S. Russell in his 
book The Method and Message of Jewish Apocalyptic (London: SCM 
Press, 1964). He mentions among others the heightened symbolism, 
the deterministic outlay of future events, time specifications, 
angel ministries, and the cosmic dimensions of the final conflict

--- Page 241 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 231 
of good and evil between heaven and earth; a new eschatology that 
retains an underlying continuity with the eschatology of the other 
prophets (see pp. 264-271). 
From an Adventist perspective, hermeneutical importance 
attaches to the observation by L. E. Froom that the three flour-
ishing periods of prophetic interpretation in the Christian Church--
the early church, the Reformation, and the Second Advent Awakening--
recognized in the apocalyptic books of Daniel and Revelation 
three unique characteristics (The Prophetic Faith, vol. 1, p. 164; 
vol. 2, pp. 783-790; vol. 3, pp. 738-743): 
1. Both books contain several series of outline prophecies 
that unfold an unbroken sequence of events leading up to the 
establishment of the eternal kingdom of God. 
2. The focus of these prophetic series is the perennial con-
flict between the nations and the Israel of God, between the Anti-
christ and Christ. 
3. Each distinct series reveals a repetition and further 
enlargement of certain parts of a previous series, always focusing 
on redemptive history, specifically on the final conflict of good 
and evil. 
These characteristics set the stage for some principles of 
end-time prophetic interpretation. On the basis that law and 
order reign in the realm of biblical apocalyptic, Christ being 
the bright center of all covenant promises, we suggest the follow-
ing as guiding hermeneutical principles for apocalyptic interpre-
tation: 
1. The OT apocalyptic and the NT apocalyptic constitute a 
general spiritual unity in and through Christ Jesus. 
2. It is important for the gospel interpretation of the OT 
apocalyptic to determine, when the data permits, where each pro-
phetic outline series passes the time of the cross of Christ, for 
OT terminology and imagery from that point on would receive a 
Christological interpretation. 
3. OT apocalyptic prophecies that have remained unfulfilled, 
generally because of Israel's failure to meet God's conditions, 
will find their fulfillment in the faithful remnant people of Jesus 
Christ, according to the NT and its apocalyptic. 
4. Interpretation of the NT apocalyptic must first consider 
the historical and theological root context in the OT, yet recognize

--- Page 242 ---
232 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
the hermeneutical weight of the wider context of both testaments. 
5. Although the same symbol in different apocalyptic outline 
series may carry the same basic meaning, each symbol is to be 
determined in its precise historical application by its own imme-
diate context, where it may have a different historical or geo-
graphical application. (This hermeneutical principle is especially 
relevant to a comparative study of the series of the seven trumpets 
and the series of the seven plagues in Revelation.) 
6. As the apocalypse of John refers more than 490 times to 
the OT (and thus theologically, many other books of the Bible seem 
to meet and end in the apocalypse) it becomes a valid principle to 
determine how the redemptive history and message of each book find 
their culmination in the apocalypse. 
A Multiplex Approach  
In order to understand the mysteries of the biblical apoca-
lyptic a multiplex approach seems to be required. This writer 
sees at least three complementary approaches to have proved essen-
tial--a recognition of: 
1. The typological structure. 
2. The promise-fulfillment idea. 
3. The salvation-historical perspective. 
The Typological Structure  
In the NT not only the OT sacrifices--together with the 
priestly, kingly, and prophetic offices--are explained to be types 
of Jesus Christ and His office but also some historical events in 
the history of ancient Israel have typological virtue for Christ, 
His church, and His avowed enemies. It is valid that a typological 
structure be identified with certainty by a NT witness only. This 
principle protects the interpreter against allegorism and rigid 
literalism (see SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, pp. 37, 38). 
In suggesting that typology in the Bible presupposes a redemp-
tive history in the past, the present, and the future, culminating 
in the historical advents of Christ Jesus (see Heb 1:1-3), we are 
following the generally accepted distinctions between typological, 
allegorical, symbolical, and literal interpretation as spelled out 
by Leonhard Goppelt in his classical work TYPOS. Die typoZogische

--- Page 243 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 233 
Deutung des aZten Testaments im Neuen (1939, 1966). A biblical 
typological structure is characterized, then, at once by its 
analogy and intensification of type and antitype. To this basic 
continuity belongs the religious conviction that "the God of the 
Old Testament is the Father of Jesus Christ and that Jesus of 
Nazareth is the Christ, that is, He who fulfills and completes 
the Old Testament redemptive history" (Goppelt). 
On this basis Goppelt arrives at the fundamental conclusion 
that the OT types are expressions of a relationship with the God 
of the OT, whereas all NT antitypes are defined by their relation-
ship with Christ. The OT therefore cannot be truly and fully 
understood apart from Jesus Christ and the NT (cf. 2 Cor 3:14-16). 
The indispensability of the typological approach through Christ 
for an exegetical methodology of the OT has been expressed well 
by H. W. Wolff in Essays on OZd Testament Hermeneutics (ed., C. 
Westermann, 1966, p. 191). 
The Christological-eschatological qualification of the type-
antitype relationship was introduced by Christ Himself. He saw 
in the OT prophets, kings, and sanctuary cultus, types of His own 
Messianic mission. Revealing Himself to the Jews as the Messiah, 
He announced: 
"Behold, something greater than Jonah is here" (Mt 12:41, 
"Behold, something greater than Solomon is here" (Mt 12:42, 
RSV). 
"I tell you, something greater than the temple is here" (Mt 
12:6, RSV). 
In this sense Jesus also related himself to David, Israel's 
greatest theocratic king (Mt 12:3, 4; 22:41-45, RSV). 
David once failed miserably because of his acts of premedi-
tated murder and adultery. In this he distorted the role of his 
royal office as typifying the perfect Shepherd, the Messiah. Yet 
David remains a type of Christ because of his true prefigurations 
of Christ, the shepherd king of Israel. 
The Persian king Cyrus, who defeated Babylon in 539 B.C. by 
diverting the waters of the river Euphrates, was called by Isaiah 
an "anointed" one of Yahweh, and his acts in delivering Judah from 
Babylon were predicted accurately by the prophets Isaiah and Jere-
miah (Is 44:28; 45:1-6; Jer 50, 51). History fulfilled these 
promises of deliverance for the Israel of God, together with the 
RSV).

--- Page 244 ---
234 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
paralleling doom prophecies for Babylon (see PX, pp. 531, 552). 
Although it all seemed finished then, the last Bible book sur-
prisingly reveals that this history of Israel's suppression by 
Babylon and her sudden deliverance by means of the drying up of 
Babylon's waters has typological application to the final deliver-
ance of the Israel of God. (See Rev 14:8; 16:12-21; 17.) 
In Rev 15 the future remnant people of Christ, "those who had 
conquered the beast and its image" (vs. 2), are pictured as sing-
ing triumphantly "the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the 
song of the Lamb" (vs. 3, RSV). This may he seen as a reference 
to Moses' and Israel's song of triumph after their deliverance 
from Egypt and the destruction of their persecutors at the Red Sea 
by divine intervention (Ex 15). The implication, then, is clearly 
that the historic exodus experience of ancient Israel and even her 
song of victory have typological value for the remnant people of 
Christ in the end. In this way the apocalypse makes the OT rele-
vant for God's covenant people today. 
Every time the apocalypse of John mentions and applies a 
Hebrew name or place or refers to an OT person or event, the typo-
logical pattern calls for determination of the original redemptive-
historical value of such a term in relation to God's covenant with 
ancient Israel. Only then can the proper Christological and eccle-
siological meaning be drawn by structural analogy. 
The typological principle applies not only to the name Israel 
but also to the names of Israel's enemies--such as Babylon, Egypt, 
and Edom--so that the ancient enemies of God's people function as 
types of the enemies of the true church of Christ Jesus (cf. Rev 
19:13, 15, and Is 63:1-6). Thus the divine judgment of the ten 
plagues on Egypt (Ex 7-12) would seem to function as a type of 
the last plagues to be sent on a rebellious and impenitent world 
bent on the destruction of the people of Christ who await an exodus 
from the present age (see Rev 16:1-11). The judgment on ancient 
Babylon also is incorporated in the imagery of the seven last 
plagues (Rev 16:12, 19). 
The Promise-Fulfillment Idea  
In another dimension the relationship of the OT and NT is of 
promise and fulfillment. The NT proclaims the Christological ful-
fillment of God's covenant promises to Israel (Jn 5:39; 2 Cor 1:20). 
This fact implies confirmation and advanced unfolding of the OT 
promises in Christ (2 Pe 1:19). Consequently, the OT remains the 
book of hope for the Christian Church (compare 2 Pe 3:13 with Is 
65:17; Mt 5:5 with Ps 37:22, 29).

--- Page 245 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 235 
In this sense the OT's unfulfilled conditional prophecies 
regarding Israel and her enemies remain as promises relevant to 
the Christian Church, the new-covenant Israel. Here applies Paul's 
word: "It is not as though the word of God had failed" (Rom 9:6, 
RSV). The book of Revelation summarizes, continues, and unfolds 
the OT promise that ultimately God will dwell among His covenant 
people, specifying them as the people who have washed their robes 
in the blood of the Lamb of God (see Rev 22:14; 7:14). 
The OT curse of final destruction will be realized by the 
impenitent enemies of God and the Lamb (see Rev 6:15-17; 17:14; 
19:11-21). The apocalypse reveals that only Christ--the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah, the Root of David--can secure the fulfillment 
of all the apocalyptic promises, for He alone conquered all evil, 
and therefore He is worthy to open the scroll (perhaps the title 
deed of the earth) and its seals (see Rev 5). 
The underlying and all-important theme of the apocalypse of 
Jesus Christ (Rev 1:1) is that the God of Israel will faithfully 
fulfill His covenant promises through Christ Jesus. John sees in 
vision a rainbow, symbol of promise, round the throne of God! 
(Rev 4:3). 
A better understanding of the messages of the apocalypse will 
result in a revival of faith, hope, and courage and awareness of 
how close and decided God's communion is with His people. It also 
will lead to faithful reformation of life in fuller obedience to 
God's eternal covenant (Rev 1:3; 12:17; 14:12). 
A common hermeneutical failing has been to interpret the OT 
apocalyptic prophecies without regard for the NT Christological 
aspect. Such an approach, therefore, may cling to the very letter 
of race and geography of OT prophecies, appealing to so-called 
normal and natural exegesis of these passagesi and yet lead to 
unsound conclusions. 
In order to understand the Christological fulfillment of the 
ancient apocalyptic prophecy of Daniel (and portions of Ezekiel, 
Joel, Zechariah, and the Psalms), it is necessary to let the gos-
pel of Jesus Christ and the NT apocalyptic determine in what glo-
rious way God will fulfill all His covenant promises. This approach 
will acknowledge the indispensable function of the progress of sal-
vation history, the history of divine fulfillment in Christ Jesus 
and His covenant people.

--- Page 246 ---
236 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
The Salvation-Historical Perspective 
The Bible presents itself not as a collection of moral codes 
and unconditional prophecies about the Jews but, rather, as the 
witness of God's righteous deeds, His redemptive and punitive acts 
in the history of Israel, and their culmination in the cross and 
resurrection of Jesus Christ. The conditional divine promises and 
threatenings, the blessings and the curses, are all embedded in 
certain historical situations and cannot and may not be considered 
in the abstract as a fixed guarantee irrespective of the religious-
moral response. 
Divine election demands a living faith-obedience relationship 
in God's covenant of grace. This is the message of Dt 28-30 and 
Lev 26 as reiterated in Jer 18:7-10. Even when the condition of 
repentance is not explicitly mentioned, as in Jonah's judgment 
message to Nineveh, it is implied. The judgments on Sodom and 
Gomorrah and on the antediluvian world, however, reveal that God 
is free to set limits to His grace according to His will. 
The place and function of the Assyrian-Babylonian captivity 
looms large in the OT. Practically all the prophets have written 
their messages in conjunction with this captivity. 
The NT proclaims that the first advent of Jesus Christ was the 
irrevocable test of the Jewish nItion to be counted as the chosen 
people (Mt 21:33-43; Jn 15:1-6). 	 On the basis of Jesus' Messianic 
authority, the twelve tribes of the chosen people were to be con-
tinued in the Messianic age exclusively through the twelve apostles 
of Christ's own election (Mt 18:15-20; Jn 15:16). 
Here lies the acid test of a Christocentric exposition of a 
general and end-time biblical eschatology. God has made Himself 
and His holy will fully and finally known through Jesus Christ 
(Jn 1:18; 12:48, 49). Jesus is appointed by the Father as the 
judge of all the earth, of both Israel and the Gentiles (Jn 5:22). 
This gospel truth has hermeneutical value for the interpre-
tation of Daniel's (and Joel's and Ezekiel's) apocalyptic prophe-
cies and all other judgment prophecies. This Christological prin-
ciple is essentially simple. All those OT prophecies that apply to 
the time after the cross of Christ--that is, to eschatological time 
--will find their fulfillment solely in and through Christ and His 
covenant people as the true Israel of God and in their avowed ene-
mies. Here the NT provides the key to unlock the treasure house 
of the OT apocalyptic. Without this salvation-historical perspec-
tive of Christ Jesus the OT apocalyptic can be expounded only with-
in the literalism of a Christ-rejecting Judaism. The Christian

--- Page 247 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 237 
faith finds its very substance in the confession that Jesus and 
the NT interpret the OT covenant promises and doom prophecies with 
divine authority. The God of the OT is in the NT revealed to be 
Jesus Christ. The majestic and awesome theophanies (appearances 
of Yahweh's glory) of old are explained to be Christophanies 
(appearances of Christ's glory). 
Before proceeding to some examples in which the above herme-
neutical principles are applied, this writer would indicate once 
again that his concept and use of apocalyptic is not typical of 
the current revival in apocalyptic. Many scholars might be reti-
cent to consider as apocalyptic some of the scripture portions 
about to be discussed. However, on the basis of the definition 
presented and followed in this chapter, we shall proceed. 
This may also be an appropriate juncture at which to deny 
that allegorizing has infiltrated the hermeneutic presented. It 
may be acknowledged that some of the NT links to OT prophecies 
are not explicitly named (as when Christ cites Daniel or when Paul 
cites David), but this writer believes that the evidence of quota-
tions of or allusions to the OT by the NT apocalyptical writings--
especially the allusions in Revelation--justifies the interpreta-
tions given. Some details of the interpretations may not have been 
generally accepted nor explicitly considered by some Adventist 
writers, but careful evaluation of the lines of thought, the evi-
dence offered, and the references given is invited. 
Relevancy of Joel's End-Time Eschatology 
The OT prophet Joel announced the promise of a great outpour-
ing of God's Spirit on a repentant Zion (2:28, 29). Was this prom-
ise fulfilled prior to the cross of Christ? The OT seems to give 
no evidence of it. The prophecy, therefore, still awaited its 
fulfillment when Jesus appeared. 
On the day of Pentecost the apostle Peter applied this proph-
ecy of Joel 2 to the dramatic outpouring of the Holy Spirit by the 
ascended and exalted Christ on the waiting Christ-believing Isra-
elites. Peter quoted the prophecy of Joel 2:28-32 and proclaimed 
its fulfillment at Pentecost to be on the basis of Christ's aton-
ing death and heavenly enthronement as priest and king (Acts 2: 
16-21, 33). Joel, however, had connected his prophecy with the 
"great and terrible" judgment day, when the final remnant of Judah 
would be gathered together on Mount Zion in Jerusalem to receive 
protection and refuge (2:31, 32). 
The antagonistic heathen nations besieging Mount Zion would

--- Page 248 ---
238 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
be outside the holy city, gathered together in the valleys around, 
significantly called the "valley of Jehoshaphat" by Joel (3:2, 12); 
that is, the valley of Yahweh's judgment. Only God's intervention 
would vindicate the faithful remnant of Judah and honor God's cove-
nant to them at the moment of extremity (see ch. 3). This judgment 
would rescue Israel and destroy her persecuting enemies. Was this 
prophecy of Joel also fulfilled at the first advent of Christ? 
Were the nations gathered in the "valley of Jehoshaphat" and 
destroyed? Evidence from the NT seems rather to recognize a 
spiritual-eschatological fulfillment on the day of Pentecost, when 
many nations were represented in Jerusalem (Acts 2:5-11). Paul in 
Rom 10:13 quotes Joel 2:32 as applying to his gospel ministry to 
both Jews and Gentiles. With regard to the comparatively few 
Christ-believing Jews he states explicitly: "So too at the present 
time there is a remnant, chosen by grace" (Rom 11:5, RSV). 
Since Pentecost the nations everywhere can be considered in 
a "valley of decision" (Joel 3:14) about Christ and His people, 
some being converted to Christ through the preaching of the gos-
pel. However, the great and terrible day of God's final and irrevo-
cable decision has not yet arrived. Consequently Joel 2:28-32 and 
Joel 3 still await their dramatic final application at the second 
advent of Christ. Jesus Himself interpreted the terrible day of 
Yahweh to be His own second advent to judge the world (Mt 25:31ff.). 
The most elaborate NT exposition of Joel 2:32; 3, is found in 
Rev 14. This chapter of the apocalypse proves to be of highest 
importance for the mission and credentials of the remnant church. 
Rev 14 consists of three parts, which are intertwined with the 
immediate context. Each part appears to have an OT root that 
serves to explain the fundamental meaning of the whole of Rev 14 
in salvation-historical perspective. 	 For our purpose it suffices 
to clarify briefly the application of our hermeneutical principles 
for biblical apocalyptic. 
Revelation 14:1-5 (part 1) portrays Mount Zion and on it the 
Lamb (Christ) and with Rim a triumphant Israel, 144,000, with 
Christ's and the Father's names in their foreheads, indicating to 
whom they belong. These 144,000 are therefore true Christians, 
yet also are pictured as coming from the twelve tribes of Israel 
(as mentioned in Rev 7). Here a link with Joel 2:32 becomes visi-
ble. Furthermore, Rev 14:14-20 (part 3) appears to be a develop-
ment of the judgment scene in Joel 3. Rev 14:15 clearly refers to 
Joel 3:13, and then unfolds it in the details of a double harvest. 
This apocalyptic interrelationship of Joel 3 and Rev 14 is striking 
in interpreting the judgment day of the Lord in Joel as the glori-
ous second advent of Jesus Christ, who will come as king and judge 
(Rev 14:14). This is the Christological interpretation of Joel's

--- Page 249 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 239 
apocalyptic judgment of Yahweh. Consequently, the faithful rem-
nant of Judah in Joel's apocalyptic is ultimately rescued because 
it belongs to Christ and follows Him. 
The local imagery of Joel is maintained in the background of 
Rev 14 (thus implying the spiritual unity of both the old and the 
new covenant people), and more specifically that Joel's unfulfilled 
prophecy will ultimately be fulfilled in Christ's followers. Clear 
indications are then given to confirm the universal application of 
Joel's portrayal. Whereas Joel pictured a literal Judah on the 
literal Temple mountain, the heathen nations being gathered 
together in the literal valleys around Mount Zion, Rev 14 stresses 
six times that the earth as a whole is the harvest field, both 
with regard to the faithful followers of Christ (the wheat harvest) 
and the Christ-denying people (the vintage). 
The picture of Rev 14:20 shows the root relation with Joel's 
apocalyptic. God's wrath will fall only "outside" the (holy) city, 
that is, outside Christ's remnant. God's judgment is no blind fate 
that falls indiscriminately on all people. It means deliverance 
for the faithful Israel (144,000 seems to have as its key number 
12, a definite symbol of the covenant people) and destruction for 
their avowed enemies (the 1600 stadia of blood indicate as their 
key number 4, symbolizing the four-cornered worldwide and complete 
defeat of God's enemies [Rev 7:1]). Thus Rev 14 would advance 
Joel's apocalyptic on a universal scale, Christ being revealed as 
the judge of the world. 
Relevancy of Malachi's Apocalyptic Eschatology  
Having indicated the OT root relationship of Rev 14, parts 1 
and 3, with Joel's apocalyptic, we proceed to consider the root 
relation of Rev 14:6-13 (part 2). 
This part of Rev 14, including the three angels' messages, 
elucidates the beliefs and mission of the 144,000 remnant of Israel 
(part 1). The three angels' messages are intended to prepare the 
whole world for the final judgment (part 3), therefore they con-
stitute the divine credentials for the remnant church. They por-
tray the last religious awakening and reformation in God's plan 
to prepare a people for the second advent of Jesus Christ, that 
is, the true covenant people. To establish the full import of 
this divine ultimatum to a rebellious and, self-sufficient world, 
we need to search for the possible typological structure in the 
wider context of salvation history as recorded in the canon of 
Scripture.

--- Page 250 ---
240 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
This typological structure can be found if we consider Mala-
chi's prophecy of the sending of Elijah to God's people (Mal 4:5, 
6) in the light of the NT revelation. Inasmuch as the OT closes--
or better, remains open--with this covenant promise of God, we 
can only look to the NT for any eschatological fulfillment. 
According to Christ, His forerunner John the Baptist functioned 
as the fulfillment of Malachi's prophecy of the coming of Elijah. 
(See Mt 17:10-13; 11:14.) 
How can this be understood? In the first place, we need to 
realize that Malachi's prediction of the sending of Elijah refers 
back to the message and work of reformation of the original prophet 
Elijah, who lived in the days of Israel's king Ahab and his wife 
Jezebel (1 Kings 16:30ff.). 
It was Elijah's specific work to lead Israel back to the true 
and living covenant fellowship with Yahweh out of the confusion of 
an amalgamation of Israel's religion and Baalism. Elijah finally 
brought the hour of decision for Israel on Mount Carmel with his 
last appeal: "'How long will you go limping with two different 
opinions? If the Lord [Yahweh] is God, follow him; but if Baal, 
then follow him" (1 Ki 18:21, RSV). 	 Then God's special mani-
festation of His power brought all people to a final stand for or 
against the true God. For the faithful ones there followed showers 
of blessing, for the impenitent ones, execution. The essentials 
of the Elijah message could be summarized as: 
1. Restoration of the true worship through the atoning blood 
(Elijah "repaired the altar of the Lord" [1 Ki 18:30, RSV]). 
2. Restoration of the commandments of the Lord through a 
new and willing obedience (cf. 1 Ki 18:18). 
When Malachi later predicts a return of the prophet Elijah, 
this prophecy may indicate that in a time of renewed apostasy and 
confusion God again will send Elijah's message of revival and 
reformation. This time came at the first advent of Christ, as 
attested by Jesus Himself and the angel Gabriel to the parents of 
John the Baptist (Lk 1:13-17). 
John the Baptist prepared a people to meet Christ through his 
message and baptism of true repentance and his faithful stand for 
the holy law of God's covenant before Herod the tetrarch (Lk 3:3, 
18-21). 
Therefore Jesus saw in John the Baptist the fulfillment of 
Malachi's promise of Elijah, who would "restore all things" (Mt 
17:11). Even the disciples of Jesus were unaware at first of the

--- Page 251 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 241 
relevancy of Malachi's prophecy. Yet Malachi's prophecy was not 
exhausted in this eschatological fulfillment of John's preparation 
message prior to the first advent of Christ, because Malachi had 
connected his prophecy with "the great and terrible day of the 
Lord" (4:5). This day is interpreted by the NT as the day of the 
second advent of Christ (Rev 14:14-20). Therefore it is legitimate 
to ask for the apocalyptic relevancy of Malachi's prophecy in con-
nection with the final judgment day. 
The people of the three angels' messages of Rev 14:6-12 func-
tion in this respect as the apocalyptic antitypical Elijah, as the 
predicted restoration message (PK, pp. 716, 227; SDA Bible Com-
mentary, vol. 4, p. 1184, on Mal 4:5, 6). How great, then, is the 
responsibility of that people which is called to be the fulfillment 
of the three angels of Revelation and to proclaim the Elijah mes-
sage for today! Their worldwide presence constitutes the greatest 
sign of all that the second coming of Christ is at hand. They can 
be recognized by their faithful perseverance in keeping "the com-
mandments of God, and the faith of Jesus" (Rev 14:12). 
A detailed interpretation of the three angels' messages would 
require a careful investigation of the immediate context of Rev 12-
14, and of its wider root context in Dan 7-11. Our main purpose 
here has been to show how our view of the Seventh-day Adventist 
hermeneutic of biblical eschatology and apocalyptic, respects and 
honors the intrinsic multiplex structure of a God-and-Christ-
centered unity of the OT and NT. The dynamic interrelationship 
of the OT and NT is discovered in joy through a recognition of 
their typological structure of promise and fulfillment, acknowl-
edging God in Christ as the decisive center of all covenant prom-
ises and prophecies. 
Relevancy of Daniel's  
Apocalyptic Outline Prophecies 
Jesus specifically mentioned the book of Daniel as one of 
vital importance for the early Christian Church (Mt 24:15). The 
Apocalypse of Jesus Christ by the many parallels to it emphasizes 
the increasing timeliness of Daniel's apocalyptic visions for the 
remnant church. The history of Christian expositions of Daniel 
shows that many times current events have bee made the focus of 
prophetic interpretation. Groundless sp(4Culations have brought 
the book of Daniel into ill repute. All the mor , therefore, a 
careful consideration and an application\of apoca yptic hermeneu-
tical principles that are qualified by the everlasting gospel, 
are mandatory.

--- Page 252 ---
242 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
In the first place, it is necessary to respect the given 
order of the four major visions in the book of Daniel, in chap-
ters 2, 7, 8, 10-12. They begin with the simple outline of suc-
cessive political world events (chap. 2), continue with an enlarge-
ment and amplification of religious-ecclesiastical events within 
the previously outlined political framework centering on the cove-
nant people of God and their worship (chaps. 7 and 8), and finally 
the book ends with a complicated and detailed outline of all those 
political conflicts that have a bearing on the true covenant peo-
ple of God from Daniel's time onward until the close of probation 
and the day of resurrection (chaps. 11-12:2). To approach this 
apocalyptic book from the end, that is from the last vision, and 
to work backward to explain the previous visions, has been the 
fundamental error of many efforts to open the mysteries of the book 
of Daniel that were sealed till "the time of the end" (12:4, cf. 
8:17) (cf. AA, p. 585, GC, p. 356). 
The book of Daniel is ingeniously constructed, and requires 
recognition of its structure. First, the general and simple out-
line in chapter 2, the so-called ABC of all further apocalyptic 
prophecies. Only then can the second layer, the third, and ulti-
mately the fourth be put on. Each stratum requires the knowledge 
of the previous one(s). 
Yet also a second fundamental principle of apocalyptic expo-
sition must be realized: that portion of the book of Daniel relat-
ing to the last days being sealed "until the time of the end" 
(12:4, RSV) will be unsealed only in the time of the end, that is, 
by Christ Jesus and His apocalyptic, specifically in the book of 
Revelation (see 1:1-3) and Mark 13 (par. Mt 24; Lk 21) (cf. TM, 
p. 115). 
The continuity of symbolic terminology and imagery between 
Daniel and Revelation has been commonly recognized. Yet not all 
interpret Daniel consistently through Revelation, the apocalyptic 
unsealing of Daniel by the exalted Christ. The kingdom of God 
(Yahweh) in Daniel (2:44; 7:27) is now, in the time between the 
two advents of Christ, revealed to be the kingdom "of our Lord, 
and of his Christ" (Rev 11:15; Ps 2:7-9). Therefore the outline 
prophecies of Dan 2 and 7 cover the period of time until the 
second advent of Christ in all glory and power. 
Inasmuch as the four major outline prophecies of Daniel (chaps. 
2, 7, 8, 11-12:2) begin with the world empires of Daniel's own 
days (Neo-Babylonia and Medo-Persia) and all four series end with 
the judgment day, somewhere in each series the first advent of 
Christ is necessarily passed. This may not be indicated explicitly 
in any series, but it still is of crucial importance for the 
Christian expositor from a hermeneutical point of view.

--- Page 253 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 243 
The NT teaches the consistent Christological application--
including its ecclesiological aspect--of the whole covenant termi-
nology and imagery of the old dispensation as far as it applies 
to the time after the first advent of Christ. The hermeneutical 
consequences of the gospel of Christ for Daniel's outline prophe-
cies may now become evident. They would require that the theo-
logical meaning of such terms as Israel, Judah, holy land, Mount 
Zion, sanctuary, saints, little horn, king of the north, and king 
of the south would be applied Christologically and ecclesiologi-
cally from the point at which an outline series moves into the 
new era. When Christ thus becomes the hermeneutical key to unlock 
the mysteries of Daniel's apocalyptic, its profound eschatological 
message can be unsealed for the Christian Church without arbitrary 
interpretations or unspiritual Middle-East speculations. 
The consistent Christological application of Dan 7 gave the 
first Reformation in the sixteenth century the conviction of 
identifying the persecuting antichrist and its desolating abomi-
nation after the cross of Christ. (For documentation, see Froom, 
Prophetic Faith, vol. 2, pp. 245-247; 254-256; 433-439). The 
consistent Christological application of Daniel 8, specifically 
with regard to the sanctuary and its cleansing (or restoration 
in its rightful place) for "the time of the end" (see Dan 8:14, 
17), gave rise to the Seventh-day Adventist Church during the 
nineteenth century and gave her the conviction of a specific 
mandate and mission as a movement of destiny (see Froom, Ibid., 
vol. 4, pp. 877-905; and in Movement of Destiny, chap. 36). 
The consistent Christological application to the terminology 
and imagery in the problematic chapter of Dan 11 could provide an 
interpretation that is not based on the shifting sands of politi-
cal, racial, and territorial speculations but, rather, on the 
everlasting Rock Jesus Christ. 
The critical question is: where in the outline series of 
Dan 11 does the prophetic portrayal pass the first advent of Christ 
and also enter into the time of the end? 
The series of Dan 11 may be believed to enter the time after 
the cross of Christ, from verse 31 onward, because verse 31 speaks 
about the setting up of "the abomination that makes desolate" (RSV), 
profanation of the temple, the taking away of the "continual" 
(burnt offering) or "daily" (mediation service). Here Dan 11 
reveals its repetition and enlargement of chapter 8, as is often 
recognized. Dan 11, therefore, basically is an amplification of 
Dan 8. The wicked power described in Dan 11:31-39 possesses the 
same characteristics as the power portrayed in Dan 8:11-13. The 
same terminology and imagery are used in both prophetic outlines,

--- Page 254 ---
244 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
each beginning with the rule of Medo-Persia: eventually a cruel, 
self-deifying enemy of the covenant people of God will arise, 
intrude the glorious land (Palestine), cast down the truth (that 
is, the true religious worship), trample underfoot both the sanc-
tuary and its host (that is, the worshipers in it), and replace 
the truth by his own worship in "transgression," the desolating 
or devastating abomination. 
It is self-evident that the same hermeneutical principle and 
consistency of application would be required in interpreting Dan 11 
as Dan 8. In both outlines the wicked king arises against the 
Prince of the host, the Prince of princes (8:11, 25; 11:22), a 
seeming reference to the Messiah, the leader of the Israel of God 
(cf. also Dan 9:25; Jos 5:15). 
The traditional interpretation by the Christian Church has 
applied the blasphemous king of Dan 11:36ff. to the antichrist, 
whom the apostle Paul saw taking his seat within "the temple of 
God" (2 Th 2:4)--that is, within the Christian Church (cf. Eph 2: 
20-22; 2 Cor 6:16) (see Froom, The Prophetic Faith, vol. 2, pp. 
529-531, 793). This Christological-ecclesiological interpretation 
of Dan 11:31-39 was continued in the prophetic expositions of the 
Millerites (from 1831-1844), and in those of the principal Sabba-
tarian Adventists (from 1844-1875).3  The critical issue, however, 
has to do with the interpretation of the final portion of Dan 11, 
verses 40-45; 12:1, 2; for this part is commonly recognized as 
still unfulfilled prophecy. Here everything depends on one's 
Christocentric hermeneutical principles of apocalyptic interpre-
tation and their consistent application. But at best, there is 
room for tentativeness when moving beyond inspired interpretation 
of unfulfilled prophecy. 
As soon as Christ and His true covenant people are ignored 
at the heart and center of apocalyptic, immediately and necessarily 
the focus of attention seems to be directed to such unspiritual 
matters as territory and race by themselves, separate from Christ 
and His people. Thus Christ and the NT are subordinated to the 
OT and consequently rejected as the superior and decisive norm of 
apocalyptic interpretation. Neither the Jewish race or kings as 
such, nor any Middle-East territory, nor some ancient national 
enemy of the Jewish nation such as Babylon or Egypt were ever at 
the heart of God's covenant with the patriarchs and with Israel. 
The God of the OT Himself is the center of all the promises that 
He will dwell among His people. 
Early, the Creator of man chose Abram and later the twelve 
tribes of Israel for the benefit of the whole human race, that 
all the families (Gentiles) of the world might be blessed in

--- Page 255 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 245 
Christ Jesus, the Saviour of the world, and might worship God 
through Him (see Gn 12:3; Gal 3:6-29). Accordingly, all four 
major outline prophecies of Daniel, inspired by the God of Abra-
ham, reveal this universal scope and significance for all Gentiles; 
and even climax in a final cosmic conflict between heaven and 
earth. This universal purpose of God's election of Abram and 
Israel, that God's "salvation may reach to the end of the earth" 
(Is 49:6, RSV; 45:22-25), is now further unfolded in the gospel 
message of the apostle Paul (Eph 1-3; Rom 11) and in the book of 
Revelation as being ultimately fulfilled in the doxologies to the 
Father and the Son by all creatures in heaven and on earth (see 
Php 2:5-11; Rev 5:13, 14). 
We have shown above our view that the apocalyptic portrayals 
of Joel and Malachi are developed in Rev 14 in a worldwide 
fulfillment. 
It is essential to realize the the unfulfilled passage of 
Dan 11:40-45; 12:1, 2, must be interpreted according to the same 
hermeneutical principles as the apocalyptic of Joel and Malachi. 
There can be only one harmonious apocalyptic in the OT, as 
there is only one apocalyptic in the NT. And both the OT and the 
NT apocalyptic are one in Christ. This implies that the OT apoca-
lyptic (including Dan 11:40-45; 12:1, 2) will be fulfilled accord-
ing to the Christological interpretation in Revelation, chapters 
12 to 22 in particular. Any hermeneutic that fails to demonstrate 
the intrinsic theological unity of the OT and NT must be regarded 
as an inadequate hermeneutic. 
The imagery of a faithful remnant gathered together on Mount 
Zion in Jerusalem surrounded by confederated enemies in the "valley 
of Jehoshaphat" as pictured in Joel, Ezekiel, Zechariah, and Daniel 
(11:40-45), is not spiritualized away in Rev 14, but extended and 
universalized to encompass the whole world (see Rev 16:14). The 
matter at issue in this apocalyptic cosmic war is not race or 
territory but the name of God, the truth of His covenant, and the 
vindication of His covenant people (see Joel 3:2, 3; Eze 38:16; 
39:22, 25-29; Zec 12:5-8; Rev 12:17; 14:12). 
Basically this seems to be the picture of Dan 11:40-45; 12:1. 
The portrayal, like chapters 11 and 8, is couched in OT terminology 
and therefore is Palestine cntered. The "king of the north" (or 
Babylon; cf. Jer 1:15; 25:9) will once again (see vs. 31) invade 
the glorious land (Palestine) (Dan 11:41, 45) when he goes forth 
"with great fury to exterminate and utterly destroy many" (vs. 
44, RSV). However, his aim is to conquer Jerusalem and destroy 
the covenant people of God gathered together on Mount Zion, where 
the Lord dwells in His sanctuary (cf. Joel 2:32; 3:16, 17).

--- Page 256 ---
246 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
And he [the king of the north] shall pitch his 
palatial tents between the sea and the glorious holy 
mountain; yet he shall come to his end, with none to 
help him. "At that time shall arise Michael, the 
great prince who has charge of your people. And there 
shall be a time of trouble, such as never has been 
since there was a nation till that time; but at that 
time your people shall be delivered, every one whose 
name shall be found written in the book" (Dan 11:45; 
12:1, RSV). 
This is Daniel's portrayal of the OT apocalyptic war between 
heaven and earth, crystallized between the faithful remnant of 
Israel and Babylon. The final battleground centers on Mount Zion, 
which is called "the glorious holy mountain" (Dan 11:45) because 
the Lord is dwelling in His Temple on Mount Zion in the northern 
part of Jerusalem (see Ps 48:1, 2). 
In the portrayal of Dan 11, the last enemy of the Israel of 
God will besiege the city of God. Taking his seat close to the 
holy mountain (Zion), "between the [Mediterranean] sea and the 
glorious holy mountain" (Dan 11:45, RSV), he prepares for a final 
attack upon the holy city. Then comes the surprise--"yet"--he 
shall suddenly "come to his end, with none to help him" (vs. 45, 
RSV). The reason is given: "Michael, the great prince" (12:1) 
of Israel shall arise to vindicate the covenant of God at the 
hour of their extremity. He will at once destroy the persecutor 
and deliver His chosen ones. 
This climactic end presents basically the same picture as 
the prophets Joel, Ezekiel, and Zechariah present. When Christ 
comes as king and judge (Rev 14:14) He will intervene on behalf 
of His covenant people on "Mount Zion," and destroy the persecu-
tors "outside the city" (Rev 14:20, RSV). In this way the OT 
apocalyptic contains for the Christian Church at once .an exhor-
tation to be faithful to the covenant of God and a promise of 
ultimate deliverance for those who persevere until the end. Those 
who have died in hope, not having received the promise, "shall 
awake . . . to everlasting life" (Dan 12:2, RSV). 
When thus Daniel and Revelation are connected, viewing the 
apocalypse of John as the advanced unfolding and Christological 
interpretation of Daniel, not only is the theological unity of 
OT and NT apocalyptic maintained and honored but also Christ is 
uplifted as the divine and faithful Saviour of Israel. In all 
eternity the covenant people of both the old and the new dispensa-
tion will join the heavenly choir in singing praises to their Crea-
tor God, who has united "all things in him [Christ], things in 
heaven and things on earth" (Eph 1:10, RSV).

--- Page 257 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 247 
NOTES  
1J. F. Walvoord, Israel in Prophecy (Zondervan: Grand 
Rapids, 1962), p. 93. This compartmentalizing exegesis of the OT 
by itself in isolation from the NT can be seen in many of the 
presentations given at the "Jerusalem Conference on Biblical 
Prophecy," 1971. See Prophecy in the Making, edited by C. F. H. 
Henry (Creation House, Ill., 1971). The position of G. D. Young 
is typical for modern Protestant Futurism when he states: "There 
may be passages in the Scriptures in which the church is spoken 
of as the Israel of God, or even the new Israel. Our covenant is 
the new covenant. But it surely is a bit too much to expect that 
Jews could so read their Bible and believe that" (p. 163). The 
matter at issue is not whether a Jew reading his Old Testament 
could ever conclude that the church is the new-covenant people. 
How could he? The real issue is whether the Jew accepts through 
the New Testament Jesus of Nazareth as the promised Messiah of 
Israel. Then, and only then, a Jew can believe that the new-
covenant people are the church of Christ Jesus and His twelve 
apostles (see Eph 2:11-22). 
A second point of misunderstanding, which is of no-less-
serious nature, is the conclusion that Dt 30 foretells a return 
of the Jewish nation to Jerusalem after a second dispersion, or 
scattering, among the nations; as Young states, having quoted Dt 
30:5, "and this, God said, would be their lot after an interna-
tional dispersion and not merely the captivity in Egypt" (p. 164). 
The idea often propounded is that the later Assyrian captivity 
(of the ten northern tribes of Israel, since 722 B.C.), and 
Babylonian captivity (of Judah, from 605-536 B.C.), are not a 
scattering of Israel among all the nations, as the prophecies of 
Dt 30; Jer 30:3; 31:8-14; Eze 39:25-28; Amos 9:11-15; describe 
(see also J. F. Walvoord, "The Future of Israel," in Ibid., pp. 
336f.; cf. his Israel in Prophecy, esp. pp. 67-79). This evalua-
tion of the Assyrian-Babylonian exile, however, seems untenable in 
view of the fact that the heathen nations were trading their cap-
tured slaves through the Phoenicians (Tyre and Sidon) to all 
nations in all directions, see Eze 27:13; Joel 3:2-6. For a 
thorough treatment of all the arguments of Futurism from the OT, 
see the scholarly Het Herstel van Israel volgens het Oude Testa-
ment, by Dr. G. Ch. Aalders (Kok: Kampen, no date given); also 
by same Dutch author, De Oud-Testamentische Profetie en de Staat 
Israel (Kok: Kampen, 1949). 
2See, e.g., W. Zimmerli, "Promise and Fulfillment," in 
Essays on OT Hermeneutics, pp. 89-122; esp. pp. 113-116. G. Ch. 
Aalders, De OT Profetie en de Staat Israel (Kok: Kampen 1949), 
p. 29, and his Commentaar op Daniel (1962), pp. 230, 234, refers

--- Page 258 ---
248 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
to Dan 9:27 as the prediction of the final desolation or rejection 
of national Israel as the true covenant people after the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. 
3See chart 4 on the principle Sabbatarian Adventists, Froom, 
Prophetic Faith, vol. 4, pp. 1118, 1119. Uriah Smith differed 
from James White, Joseph Bates, Hiram Edson, and other Adventist 
writers in that he interpreted the "king" of Dan 11:36-39 as 
France during the French Revolution. Here he followed as his 
guiding source and authority Alexander Keith and other English 
premillennialists (see Froom, Prophetic Faith, vol. 4, p. 1113; 
vol. 3, p. 744, chart). The Study Report in Ministry, March, 
1954, pp. 22-27, has indicated the incorrectness of this 
interpretation. 
4U. Smith in 1871 suddenly changed his view on the "king of 
the north" from papacy to Turkey, accepting the popular interpre-
tation of the British premillennialists. Froom observes on this 
matter: "In this he differed from White and certain other Advent-
ist writers" (Prophetic Faith, vol. 4, p. 1121; cf. also p. 1116, 
note 15. See also the charts on pp. 847, 1119. On the British 
expositors, see chart in vol. 3, p. 744). 
READING LIST  
Berkouwer, G. C. The Return of Christ. Studies in Dogmatics. 
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., tr. 1972. 
An up-to-date orthodox view on eschatology by the lead- 
ing systematic theologian in Reformed Christianity today. 
Especially chap. 11, "Israel as Sign?" is a contribution. 
Froom, L. E. Movement of Destiny. Washington, D.C.: Review 
and Herald Pub. Assoc., 1971. 
. "The Advent Message Built Upon the Foundations of Many 
Generations." Our Firm Foundation. Vol. II (pp. 77-182). 
Washington, D.C.: 	 Review and Herald Pub. Assoc., 1953. 
Henry, C. F. H., ed. Prophecy in the Making. Carol Stream, Ill.: 
Creation House, 1971. 
A report of the Jerusalem Conference on Biblical 
Prophecy. The general trend is futurism and literalism. 
Ladd, G. E. Crucial Questions About the Kingdom of God. 4th pr. 
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., 1961. 
Basically a refutation of Dispensationalism.

--- Page 259 ---
Prophetic and Apocalyptic Prophecy 	 249 
Price, G. Mc. The Greatest of the Prophets. Mountain View, Calif.: 
Pacific Press Pub. Assoc., 1955. 
. The Time of the End. Nashville, Tenn.: Southern Pub. 
Assoc., 1967. 
These two books, the first on Daniel, the second on 
Revelation, offer a deepening, but not always representative, 
SDA understanding of biblical apocalyptic. 
Ramm, B. L. Protestant Biblical Interpretation. A Textbook of 
Hermeneutics. 3d rev. ed. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book 
House, 1971. 
A valuable conservative Protestant treatise. 
, et al. Hermeneutics. A reprint of Section 3 of Baker's 
Dictionary of Practical Theology (1967). Grand Rapids, Mich.: 
Baker Book House, 1967. 
Strand, K. A. The Open Gates of Heaven. A Brief Introduction to 
Literary Analysis of the Book of Revelation. 2d ed. Ann 
Arbor, Mich.: Ann Arbor Pub., 1972. 
A fine contribution from an SDA scholar. 
Wolff, H. W. "The Hermeneutics of the Old Testament." Essays on 
OT Hermeneutics. Edited by C. Westermann. 3d ed. (pp. 160-
199). Richmond, Va.: J. Knox Press, 1966. 
Zimmerli, W. "Promise and Fulfillment." Essays on OT Hermeneutics. 
(pp. 89-122). Edited by C. Westermann. Richmond, Va.: J. 
Knox Press, 1963. 
The essays of Wolff and Zimmerli represent the new 
emphasis on the Christocentric unity of the whole Bible by 
German evangelical scholars.

--- Page 260 ---
Professor of religion on the La Sierra 
campus of Loma Linda University, Dr. 
Norval F. Pease has combined teaching, 
pastoral, and college administrative 
ministries to the Seventh-day Adventist 
Church since 1931. His Ph.D. in rheto-
ric and public address, received at 
Michigan State University in 1964 is 
related to his specialization in applied 
theology. From 1967-1971 he was chair-
man of the religion department on the 
La Sierra campus.

--- Page 261 ---
PART V 
INTERPRETATION IN PROCLAMATION 
14. Preaching and Biblical Interpretation  
NORVAL F. PEASE 
La Sierra Campus 
Loma Linda University 
This chapter is an incursion into the area known as the the-
ology of preaching. It is intended particularly for the preaching 
minister, with whom I identify. The objective of this study is 
to explore certain theological aspects of biblical interpretation 
in the context of the work of the preacher. The first part of the 
chapter deals with recent and contemporary theories regarding 
preaching and biblical interpretation. For this reason, more quo-
tations and references to authors occur than in previous chapters 
in this book. The second area of concern is principles of bibli-
cal interpretation as they apply to preaching. This chapter is 
intended as a sequel to the material presented by the other authors 
in this symposium. 
A regrettable tension often exists between biblical scholars 
and preachers. The scholars think that preachers are superficial 
in their handling of the Scriptures, that they sacrifice accuracy 
and content for "inspiration." The preachers, in turn, think that 
scholars are so technical and philosophical that the average per-
son cannot understand what they are saying. Unfortunately, both 
sides can produce ample evidence to substantiate their concerns. 
Lawrence Toombs observes: "The scholar goes on his way writing 
books for his pupils and for other scholars, and the minister 
marches resolutely on his, satisfied with little homilies on how 
to live decently, or with analyses, some acute and some banal, of 
the social, political, and psychological scene of the present day, 
which because they deal with current topics, he has deluded him-
self into thinking are relevant."--The Old Testament in Christian 
Preaching, pp. 13, 14.

--- Page 262 ---
252 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
It is important for the minister to recognize his responsi-
bility as an interpreter of the Bible. The average parish minis-
ter may not have as much knowledge as the specialist in biblical 
studies, but he should have sufficient understanding of the Bible 
that he can rightly divide the word of truth. And he must realize 
that he is almost the only source from which the average church-
goer will learn the meaning and the relevance of the Bible. There 
was a time when common ordinary people studied the Bible for them-
selves. Observation would indicate that this time has largely 
passed. 
Contemporary Viewpoints on Preaching_ 
and Biblical Interpretation  
Thor Hall, associate professor of preaching and theology at 
the Divinity School, Duke University, is author of a book published 
in 1971 entitled The Future Shape of Preaching. To illustrate one 
of his theses he draws three circles. The first circle represents 
theological methodology. Eight different methodologies are indi-
cated at 45 degree intervals on the circumference of this circle. 
The second circle represents hermeneutics, with eight different 
kinds of hermeneutics indicated at corresponding points on the 
circumference. The third circle represents religious language, 
with eight kinds of religious language at corresponding points on 
the circle. The author's idea is clear. Each theological method-
ology results in a particular hermeneutical theory, also in a 
specific theory of communication. 
Hall's concept 
Theological 
may be charted as follows: 
Methodology Hermeneutics Religious language 
1.  Revelational. Revelational hermeneutic. Logos-Word of God. 
2.  Secular. Common-sense hermeneutic. Ordinary language. 
3.  Dialectic. Encounter hermeneutic. Two-nature theology. 
4.  Critical..  Critical integration. 3-dimensional theory. 
5.  Metaphysical. "New hermeneutic." Metaphysical event. 
6.  Historical. Historical criticism. Linguistic analysis. 
7.  Correlation. Relational hermeneutic. Symbolic of absolutes. 
8.  Existential. Existential hermeneutic. Existential game. 
This analysis tells us as Seventh-day Adventist ministers 
something we must never forget: When we choose our theology, our 
hermeneutics and our theory of religious language come in the same 
package. To be more specific, the Seventh-day Adventist who 
accepts "revelational theology" by definition finds himself in

--- Page 263 ---
Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	 253 
trouble if he tries to use encounter or existential hermeneutic in 
his biblical interpretation. Conversely, if a Seventh-day Adven-
tist advocates encounter or existential hermeneutic he should not 
be surprised if his theological methodology is questioned. 
In Hall's analysis it is significant that the only theory of 
religious language that gives full recognition to the supernatural 
is the one that is based on revelational theology and hermeneutic. 
This tells us that in our communication of our message we can well 
heed the observation of Paul: "Now we have received not the spirit 
of the world, but the Spirit which is from God, that we might un-
derstand the gifts bestowed on us by God. And we impart this in 
words not taught by human wisdom but taught by the Spirit, inter-
preting spiritual truths to those who possess the Spirit" (1 Cor. 
2:12, 13, RSV). 
Hall refers to what he calls "commonsense hermeneutic." This 
viewpoint reduces the Bible to a work of great literary worth, 
valuable as a source of religious ideas and moral values, but in 
no sense of supernatural origin. This is the language of liberal-
ism, based on secular theology, and expressed in the everyday 
language of human experience. This viewpoint stands one hundred 
eighty degrees removed from conservative Christianity, so is not 
likely to influence the thinking of the Seventh-day Adventist 
preacher. 
A bit more subtle is the existential hermeneutic, based 
largely on the theology of Rudolph Bultmann. This hermeneutical 
school demythologizes the biblical message, reducing the contents 
of the Bible to concepts acceptable to twentieth-century man. 
This viewpoint has had a profound effect on preaching. For exam-
ple, I once heard John A. T. Robinson preach a sermon on Jesus' 
healing of the daughter of the Syrophoenician woman (see Mk 7:24-
30). He pictured Jesus as an ordinary mortal filled with Jewish 
prejudices who found it difficult to respond to the request of 
the mother who was appealing to Him in behalf of her daughter. 
Bishop Robinson's hermeneutics, as revealed in his sermon, left 
nothing that could not be readily believed by the humanist, the 
secularist, the antisupernaturalist. There was no divine Christ, 
no miracle-working Lord--only a great man struggling to outgrow 
his own weakness and prejudice. The biblical record had been re-
interpreted in a completely naturalistic context. 
Still more subtle is the "encounter hermeneutic," so influen-
tial in preaching circles since Emil Brunner's Truth as Encounter. 
Preachers who accept this concept look at preaching not as the 
interpretation of a passage of Scripture but as an encounter be-
tween God and the listener in which the preacher is a medium of

--- Page 264 ---
254 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
communication and the text is involved but incidental. There is 
an element of truth in this viewpoint. The listener should exper-
ience an encounter with God as the sermon is being preached. The 
preacher should be a mouthpiece for God. But when truth itself 
is equated with this encounter, and when experience is placed above 
revealed truth, those of us who accept the Bible as the Word of God 
must object. Although truth is bigger than propositions, it is 
not correct to say that truth is not propositional. 
Related to the encounter theology is the charismatic movement. 
When the individual goes to church and receives the "spirit" and 
speaks in tongues and sees people healed, scriptural evidence is 
little likely to play a normative role for him. He has experienced 
an "encounter" with God, he thinks, that answers all his questions 
and meets all his needs. 
Related to the encounter idea is the contention of Barth and 
others that the Bible is not in itself the Word of God but that 
it becomes the Word of God when it produces a spiritual impact on 
the life of a person. In this context, preaching is considered 
as itself the Word of God. This contention is espoused by Dietrich 
Ritschl, Ronald Sleeth, Merrill Abbey, and many others who are 
often identified by the neo-orthodox label. The net result of 
this approach is the derogation of the Bible as the authoritative 
Word of God. A subjective emotional existential experience, pos-
sibly induced by music, stained-glass windows, personality, and 
tradition may be mistaken as the voice of God. And the theologi-
cal presuppositions of this school suggest that the "voice of God" 
heard under these conditions may be as authentic as the written 
Word of God. In fact, Dietrich Ritschl says: "It must be con-
sidered unbiblical to assume that a true sermon is of less power 
than the sayings of Jeremiah, or the words of the Sermon on the 
Mount, or an Epistle of Paul."--A Theology of Proclamation, p. 31. 
Another contemporary viewpoint regarding preaching holds that 
it is a sacrament. P. T. Forsythe characterized preaching as "the 
sacrament which gives value to all other sacraments."--Positive 
Preaching and the Modern Mind, p. 4. Karl Barth described preach-
ing and sacrament as "two aspects of the same thing."--The Preach-
ing of the Gospel, p. 26. Domenico Grasso, a Catholic spokesman, 
declares: "Preaching as a vehicle of faith and grace has thus a 
certain sacramentality. In it, under the visible sign of the 
human word, a supersensible reality is present and acts just as 
in the sacrament."--Preaching God's Message, p. 251. Ronald 
Sleeth, of Perkins Seminary, says: "The sermon itself should be 
regarded as a sacramental act."--Preaching the Word, p. 25. And 
Jean Jacques von Allmen, of the University of Neuchatel, says: 
"And it is by sacramental ways of thinking about homiletics, by

--- Page 265 ---
Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	 255 
a sort of extension of Christology, that we shall be able to re-
discover both the joy of preaching and the right of setting about 
it."--Preaching and Congregation, p. 15. 
There is a certain convincing quality about these oft-repeated 
statements linking preaching and the sacraments. This viewpoint 
seems to elevate preaching to a high level of importance; and as 
every preacher knows preaching needs all the help it can get. But 
to equate or relate preaching to the sacraments tends to reduce 
the importance of the written Word as the subject matter of preach-
ing. This theology tends to shift the center of preaching from 
an historical revelation to an existential experience. 
To summarize, a generation of preachers has been brought up 
on Brunner's encounter theology, the Barthian concept of the Word 
of God, and Christian existentialism, especially as taught by 
Bultmann. These, of course, are not the only influences that have 
shaped the thinking of the clergy, but they are among the most 
prominent. As a whole these theologians who have influenced 
twentieth-century preaching have denied the Bible the place in the 
preacher's world that conservative Protestant theology would--or 
should--demand. The dilemma that has been produced by this theo-
logical trend is commented on by one of its advocates, Merrill 
Abbey, of Garrett Theological Seminary: "The words of the texts 
are no longer understood as authentic words of God. Since God 
does not convey his truth in propositions, texts are not eternal 
pronouncements needing only to be explained and applied. Having 
lost this note of direct authority as the chief interpreter of an 
infallible Bible, and having failed to enter into full possession 
of any adequate alternative of the authority of the Word, the pul-
pit has been left hesitant and stammering."--The Word Interprets 
Us, p. 38. 
It is not hard to see the relationship between the preacher's 
theology and his interpretation. The principles of interpretation 
followed by the conservative or evangelical preacher who accepts 
the Bible as the Word of God will be different from those of the 
liberal or neo-orthodox preacher. And preaching itself is modi-
fied by the methods of biblical interpretation employed by the 
preacher. A man holding the encounter theology, for example, may 
be a biblical preacher, but he will use the Bible differently from 
the way the preacher who believes the Bible to be the revealed 
Word of God uses it. The preacher who considers the sermon as 
sacramental may preach from the Bible, but the authority he assigns 
to the Bible will be influenced by his theology. 
It must not be concluded that no voices have been raised 
challenging the trends that have been described above. Every

--- Page 266 ---
256 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Seventh-day Adventist minister should read Edmund P. Clowney's 
Preaching and Biblical Theology. He points out the changes that 
have taken place in the theology of preaching as a result of the 
impact of changing attitudes toward religious authority. "Virtu-
ally any words," he observes, "spoken in the situation may become 
God's Word." After reviewing contemporary attitudes he declares 
that "the authority of preaching is not heightened but lost if the 
preacher forsakes his place behind the Book. We are called to be 
Christ's but not Christs. The incarnation is not continued in us, 
so that we may declare, 'I say unto you," nor are we apostles or 
prophets, inspired of the spirit to lay afresh the foundation of 
the church for a new day. We are ministers of the Word; by God's 
grace wise men and scribes sent by Christ (Mt 23:24); evangelists, 
pastors, and teachers; men of God thoroughly furnished by the Holy 
Spirit for every good word of our calling."--p. 61. 
"Christ's but not Christs." This would be a good motto for 
preachers. When we preach, our message is not so much a proclama-
tion as an interpretation. We are dependent on the Holy Spirit, 
who inspired the Bible, but also we are dependent on the Bible, 
which the Holy Spirit inspired. Our sermons are not sacraments 
but messages drawn from God's Word. Preaching is not an "event" 
but an unfolding of truths already revealed. A contemporary 
preacher, John R. W. Stott, says: "My first and deepest convic-
tion about preaching is that a minister is never more than the 
steward of goods entrusted to him and the herald of news which he 
has been commanded to proclaim. Therefore he is never the orig-
inator of new ideas, but only the dispenser of the old. His task 
is simply to explain, to interpret, and to apply God's revealed 
and written word."--From Roddy, We Prepare and Preach, p. 179. 
This puts preaching in theological perspective. It does not 
mean that preaching is mere dry exegesis and rule-bound hermeneu-
tics. The Bible, which the preacher is to explain, interpret, and 
apply, contains the good news of a Saviour who lived and died, who 
was resurrected from the dead, who is now our advocate, and who 
is coming again. The Bible is an authentic revelation of God and 
Christ and the Holy Spirit. The Bible reveals how man should 
relate to God. With the aid of the Holy Spirit the preacher has 
plenty to explain, plenty to interpret, plenty to apply. 
Applying Principles of Hermeneutics to Preaching  
The science and art of interpreting the Bible known as herme-
neutics, or, by some authors, hermeneutic, is the same for the 
scholar, the teacher, the layman, and the preacher. The differ-
ence lies in the use that is made of the interpreted material.

--- Page 267 ---
Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	 257 
The scholar may write a book for fellow scholars; the teacher may 
explain the meaning of the Bible to his students; the layman may 
hold Bible studies with a friend. But the preacher interprets the 
Bible in order to persuade people to become Christians and to 
nurture those who are already Christians. 
Let us look at several hermeneutical principles that have 
been discussed in this symposium with the purpose of relating them 
to the peculiar task of the preacher. 
1. There is the sola scriptura principle--"the Bible only." 
This means that all preaching must be biblical preaching. I hes-
itate to use the term expository, because there is so much confu-
sion as to what this term means. The biblical sermon may take a 
number of forms. It may analyze a Bible passage, using the nat-
ural divisions of the passage as the points of the sermon. It may 
dwell on the theological and behavioral implication of a passage. 
It may deal with a subject or a human problem, using the Bible as 
the principal source of information on the subject or the key to 
the solution of a problem. This principle tells the preacher that 
he must never forget that the Bible is the Word of God, the stand-
ard of faith and practice for the Christian, and the basic source 
of preaching ideas and materials. 
2. Then, there is the principle of unity of Scripture. This 
means, as has been noted in other chapters of this book, that the 
Bible teaches one theology, not a variety of theologies. It means, 
for example, that there is no basic disagreement between the the-
ology of Paul and the theology of James. This unity is predicated 
on the presupposition that the same Holy Spirit guided all the 
Bible writers; therefore, despite their individual differences, a 
fundamental oneness persists. 
What does this mean for the preacher? It means that he will 
understand biblical theology well enough so that his sermons on 
Romans will not contradict his sermons on James. In other words, 
his preaching will unify his listeners' concept of Scripture. 
This insight will be deepened by an understanding of the place of 
Christ in Scripture. 
When a preacher plans a sermon he should always ask himself 
the question "How does the message of this sermon relate to the 
biblical message as a whole? Is it supportive or is it irrele-
vant?" To make this evaluation correctly, the preacher needs to 
know the teaching of the entire Bible about God, Christ, salvation, 
man, law, revelation, the future, and any other topics bearing on 
the relationship between God and man.

--- Page 268 ---
258 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
3. The third principle, "let Scripture explain Scripture," 
comes from the Protestant Reformation. It means that the ultimate 
criteria in determining the meaning of a portion of Scripture is 
the testimony of other biblical passages that deal directly or 
indirectly with the same subject. This principle is a corollary 
of the idea of unity of Scripture. 
What does this imply for the preacher? It tells him that he 
must do thorough work in comparing his preaching portion with other 
related biblical passages. To do this most effectively he should 
have a basic knowledge of biblical languages. Whether or not he 
knows Greek or Hebrew he must know how to use an analytical con-
cordance effectively. He must be willing to scuttle a "brilliant" 
preaching idea if he discovers it to be out of harmony with the 
real meaning of the text in the context of parallel or explanatory 
passages. 
4. The fourth principle has to do with proper interpretation 
of biblical words and sentences. This principle reminds us of the 
language gap that must be bridged. The preacher, whether or not 
he is conversant with biblical languages, must find ways of deter-
mining whether the word or words he is stressing in his sermon 
carry the idea that the Bible writer intended. For example, the 
word faith may mean "saving faith" in the highest Christian sense; 
it may mean "assenting to an idea"; it may refer to faithfulness. 
As many as six different meanings of faith have been detected in 
Paul's epistle to the Romans. 
The preacher must also be aware of the importance of sentence 
study. The meaning of a word is often made clear by its context 
in the sentence (in the original, of course) in which the word is 
used. 
Ability to evaluate translations and paraphrases is a growing 
need of every minister as new versions proliferate. This evalua-
tion must be based on sound scholarship, not on prejudices and 
personal preferences. 
5. This principle has to do with context and historical back-
ground. Because liberal scholars talk about context and historical 
background, some conservatives have grown skeptical of the whole 
concept. The fact that liberals may give undue stress to this 
principle makes it all the more important that conservatives under-
stand its proper use. 
The preacher must relate his preaching passage to the literary 
unit in which the passage is found. He must be aware of the author, 
the circumstances of writing, the time and place of writing, and

--- Page 269 ---
Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	 259 
the reason for writing. This information may not be made obvious 
in the sermon, but it needs to be part of the preacher's equipment 
as he prepares his sermon. At the same time this knowledge must 
not be interpreted as reducing the Scripture to the same level as 
man-made literature. The Scripture writers maintained their indi-
viduality and wrote in the context of their time, but they were 
God's penmen. 
Horrible blunders have been made by preachers who neglected 
to acquaint themselves with the contextual and historical back-
ground, both of the Bible and of the writings of Ellen White. As 
preachers, we owe it to our listeners and to God to be reverently 
meticulous in our interpretation of God's Word. 
6. Another important hermeneutical principle is that the 
message of the Bible must be interpreted literally unless it is 
obviously figurative. Many a preacher has succumbed to the temp-
tation to depend too much on allegory. One of the accomplishments 
of the Protestant Reformation was the shattering of the allegorical 
method of biblical interpretation that had been popular for cen-
turies. 
The preacher has the right to draw lessons from biblical pas-
sages. He may freely say, "This text suggests---" or, "This pas-
sage may be applied---." But when he says, "This text means---" 
he had better stay close to the literal meaning intended by the 
writer. Deeper meanings may be suggested by the text, but to be 
authentic they must have the clear support of other inspired 
writers. 
The interpretation of figurative expressions such as the 
symbols of prophecy presents difficult problems. Here, again, the 
safest procedure is to look for a clear statement from another 
inspired author. Preachers must exercise unusual care that they 
do not mislead their listeners by fanciful and unsupported inter-
pretations. Disillusioned laymen may lose their faith if they 
discover that their ministers do not know whereof they speak in 
the area of prophetic interpretation. 
The literal-figurative principle also warns against the de-
mythologizing methodology of the Bultmann school.. This method 
of interpretation robs the Bible of its original meaning and sub-
stitutes philosophical abstractions. The minister who follows 
this course is replacing God's revelation with human theories. 
7. An extension of the principle just discussed is known as 
the.typological principle. Typology is a legitimate approach to 
biblical interpretation. Many sermons have been preached by

--- Page 270 ---
260 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Seventh-day Adventist preachers using passages from the epistle 
to the Hebrews to unlock the mysteries of the OT sanctuary service. 
This need not be unsafe allegory or undue spiritualizing. It is, 
rather, a process of recognizing the type (generally OT) that 
finds its counterpart in the NT antitype. 
Preachers get in trouble when they use their imagination too 
freely in this area. Inferences must be supportable by reasonable 
evidence. Unsound analogies must not be employed. Unreliable 
authorities must not be used. "Private interpretations" shake 
faith in the preacher and, more tragically, in the Bible itself. 
Conclusions  
Ministers who read these pages may be tempted to exclaim, "Is 
all this really necessary?" They may question the importance of 
an understanding of current trends in the theology of preaching, 
and they may wonder whether the rules of hermeneutics are really 
meant for them. 
In answer to this question, Bernard Ramm, one of the most 
readable contemporary writers on biblical interpretation, has this 
to say: "It is felt too frequently by preachers that preaching is 
of such a nature as to exempt the preacher from close adherence 
to rules of exegesis. Proper exegesis is necessary for commenta-
tors and theologians but, preachers--it is argued--have a 'poetic 
license' with reference to scripture. This is most unfortunate 
reasoning. If the preacher's duty is to minister the Word of God, 
hermeneutics is the means whereby he determines the meaning of the 
Word of God. To ask for exemptions from the strict rules of her-
meneutics is then to ask for an exemption from preaching the true 
meaning of the Word of God. This is precisely a repudiation of 
what a man is called to preach, namely, the truth of God's Word. 
"This does not mean that preaching is nothing but public 
exegesis or drab commenting on the sacred text. There must be 
energy, life, imagination, relevancy, illustration, and passion 
in all preaching. Bookish, dry, technical exposition is not nec-
essarily preaching the Word of God. But whenever scripture is 
used, it must be used according to sound rules of hermeneutics." 
--Protestant Biblical Interpretation, p. 178. 
Sound hermeneutics should enhance the preacher's sermons. 
His messages should be more interesting, more authentic, more 
appealing, because they reflect more adequately the message of the 
Scriptures. The Adventist preacher must take seriously the fol-
lowing counsel from Ellen White: "The student of the Word should

--- Page 271 ---
Preaching and Biblical Interpretation 	 261 
not make his opinions a center around which truth is to revolve. 
He should not search for the purpose of finding texts of Scripture 
that he can construe to prove his theories, for this is wresting 
the Scriptures to his own destruction. The Bible student must 
empty himself of every prejudice, lay his own ideas at the door 
of investigation, and with humble, subdued heart, with self hid 
in Christ, with earnest prayer, he should seek wisdom from God." 
--Counsels to Teachers, p. 463. 
Preaching--real preaching--is biblical interpretation supple-
mented by the art of persuasion, and all under the guidance of the 
Holy Spirit. 
READING LIST  
Barth, Karl. The Preaching of the Gospel. Philadelphia: The 
Westminster Press, 1963. 
A presentation of the Barthian theology of preaching. 
Baumann, J. Daniel. An Introduction of Contemporary Preaching. 
Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1972. Chap. 6, 
"Biblical Truths - -Preaching the Bible," pp. 93-107. 
An evangelical approach to biblical preaching. 
Brunner, Emil. Truth as Encounter. Philadelphia: The Westminster 
Press, 1964. 
Contains the basic concepts of the Brunnerian theology 
of preaching. 
Clowney, Edmund C. Preaching and Biblical Theology. Grand Rapids, 
Michigan: Eerdmans, 1961. 
An effective defense of preaching as biblical interpre-
tation. 
Craddock, Fred B. As One Without Authority. Enid, Oklahoma: The 
Phillips University Press, 1971. Chap. 6: "Inductive Move-
ment and the Text," pp. 119-139. 
A discussion of inductive preaching in relation to the 
use of the Bible. 
Forsythe, P. T. Positive Preaching and the Modern Mind. Grand 
Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1964. 
One of the pioneers in the move away from the authority 
of the Bible in modern preaching.

--- Page 272 ---
262 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Grasso, Domenico. Proclaiming God's Message. Notre Dame, Indiana: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 1968. 
An effective presentation of a Roman Catholic theology 
of preaching. 
Miller, Donald G. The Way to Biblical Preaching. New York: 
Abingdon, 1957. 
A readable presentation of the neo-orthodox theology of 
preaching. 
Ramm, Bernard. Protestant Biblical Interpretation. Grand Rapids, 
Michigan: Baker Book House, 1970. Chap. 7: "The Devotional 
and Practical Use of the Bible," pp. 185-200. 
The homiletical observations of an evangelical authority 
on hermeneutics. 
Toombs, Lawrence E. The Old Testament in Christian Preaching. 
Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1961. 
An application of hermeneutical principles to the preach-
ing of the OT.

--- Page 274 ---
Seminary librarian for the James White 
library at Andrews University, Dr. 
Sakae Kubo holds the academic rank of 
professor of New Testament. He joined 
the faculty in 1955 following his min-
istry in Hawaii and Southern California. 
His Ph.D. was earned at the University 
of Chicago, his doctoral dissertation 
carrying the title: "p72  and Codex 
Vaticanus." 
Professor of biblical languages at the 
Seventh-day Adventist Theological Semi-
nary, Dr. Leona G. Running joined the 
faculty in 1955. She received her Ph.D. 
at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland. Her doctoral dissertation 
was entitled: "An Investigation of the 
Syriac Version of Isaiah." She started 
her career as a teacher in 1937, com-
bining it with numerous editorial re-
sponsibilities. She has also served, 
on various occasions, as a research 
assistant to the noted archaeologist, 
Dr. W. F. Albright.

--- Page 275 ---
APPENDIX 
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 
SAKAE KUBO and 
LEONA G. RUNNING 
SDA Theological Seminary 
Andrews University 
The task of biblical exegesis according to Kaiser and KUmmel 
is "to discover the objective meaning of the text, i.e., to learn 
from the text what it says about the subject matter discussed in 
it, and what this means for me personally."--Exegetical Method: 
A Student's Handbook. (New York: Seabury Press, 1967), p. 36. 
In order to do this, it is necessary to have a sound method and 
reliable tools. 
The first step in the process is to determine what the text 
is. The safest thing to do is to begin with a Bible that has a 
reliable text in the original languages. For the OT this would 
be the third edition of R. Kittel, ed., Biblia Hebraica (Stuttgart: 
WUrttembergische Bibelanstalt, 1937) until the Biblia Hebraica 
Stuttgartensia (Stuttgart: WUrttembergische Bibelanstalt, 1968-), 
edited by K. Elliger and W. Rudolph, is completed. Several fasci-
cles have already appeared. For the NT the 25th edition of Nestle-
Aland's Novum Testamentum Graece (Stuttgart: WUrttembergische 
Bibelanstalt, 1963) remains the best because of its fuller appara-
tus. The United Bible Societies' Greek New Testament (New York: 
American Bible Society, 1966), edited by Aland-Black-Metzger-
Wikgren, has a better type face and text but its apparatus is not 
as full as it should be for a good study Bible. Those who do not 
use Greek and Hebrew should avail themselves of an English Bible 
that is based on a good original text such as the. Revised Standard 
Version. The American Standard Version is quite faithful in trans-
lation, but its Greek text is not the best. On the other hand, 
the more recent New American Standard Bible is a revision of the 
American Standard Version, and its Greek text is based on the

--- Page 276 ---
266 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Nestle-Aland. Those not too well acquainted with the study of the 
text should consult Bruce Metzger's The Text of the New Testament 
(2d ed.; New York: Oxford University Press, 1968) and the some-
what outdated but standard work of B. J. Roberts, The Old Testa-
ment Text and Versions (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1951). 
The principles for determining the text in individual cases are 
discussed in these books. 
The best way to study the Synoptic Gospels is to have the 
parallel passages of all the Gospels in hand. The best Greek edi-
tion is Synopsis Quattuor Evangeliorum (Stuttgart: WUrttembergische 
Bibelanstalt, 1964), edited by Kurt Aland. The text of the Gospel 
of John is included, and in the footnotes variant readings and 
parallels from patristic sources are found. This has been pub-
lished in a Greek-English edition (1970), the English being the 
RSV text. 
After the text has been determined, one should know precisely 
what the text says. Two kinds of tools are needed for this. The 
first of these is the LEXICON. For the OT the best lexicon in 
English is now William Holladay's A Concise Hebrew and Aramaic 
Lexicon of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1971), al-
though one still needs to resort to Koehler and Baumgartner, Lexi-
con in Veteris Testamenti Libros (2d ed.; Leiden: Brill, 1958) for 
more comprehensive text citation and for nonlexical items such as 
etymological material, bibliographical entries, and the like. 
Holladay's work is mainly an abridgment of the third German edi-
tion (fascicle 1, 1967) of the latter. Two thirds of this edition 
was completed in manuscript form before the death of Professor 
Baumgartner. Material on the last seven letters is based on the 
2d edition. The lexicon for the NT is Walter Bauer's A Greek-
English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian 
Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), trans-
lated and adapted by William F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich. 
The second type of tool for knowing what the text says is 
the REFERENCE GRAMMAR. For Hebrew, the best is that of Gesenius 
and E. Kautzsch, translated by A. E. Cowley, Gesenius' Hebrew 
Grammar (2d ed.; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1910), and R. J. Wil-
liams' An Outline of Hebrew Syntax is a useful tool. For Greek, 
there are two excellent ones: Blass-Debrunner's A Greek Grammar 
of the New Testament (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), 
translated and revised by Robert Funk; and Nigel Turner's Syntax, 
which is Vol. III of Moulton's A Grammar of New Testament Greek 
(Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1963). Although not intending to be 
a thorough or systematic treatment, C. F. D. Moule's An Idiom-
book of the New Testament (Cambridge: At the University Press, 
1953) is very helpful.

--- Page 277 ---
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 	 267 
After we have determined how the text reads we should go a 
step farther than the lexical meaning by investigating more pre-
cisely the theological meaning of certain words. The best source 
for this in the NT (although from a liberal perspective) is Kittel-
Friedrich's Theological Dictionary of the New Testament (Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964-). Eight of the nine projected volumes 
have been translated from the German and published. Unfortunately, 
there is in English no such comparable work for the OT. However, 
there is such a work in German (from the same liberal perspective): 
Botterweck-Ringgren's four-volume Theologisches Warterbuch zum Alten 
Testament (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1970-), which is appearing 
in fascicles and no doubt soon will be translated into English. 
Another similar work is Jenni-Westermann's Theologisches Hand-
warterbuch zum Alten Testament (2 vols.; Munich: Ch. Kaiser, 
1971-). Some help can be found in R. B. Girdlestone, Synonyms of 
the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1948). Until the Ger-
man works above have been translated into English, the following 
two works that cover words in the OT and NT will be found useful: 
Alan Richardson, ed., A Theological Word Book of the Bible (New 
York: Macmillan, 1959) and J. J. Von Allmen, ed., A Companion to 
the Bible (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958), which has 
the title Vocabulary of the Bible (London: Lutterworth, 1958) in 
the London edition. 
Next, the immediate context of the verse should be closely 
scrutinized so that the argument and train of thought of the author 
will be clearly seen. The exegesis of the verse will then be in 
harmony with its setting. This will help one avoid falling into 
the error of pulling statements out of context and thus distorting 
them. 
After the local context of the verse has been scrutinized the 
larger context should be brought to bear on the verse. The author's 
theology, style, ways of thought and expression, purpose and objec-
tive, must be carefully considered. What we need for these are 
several types of works: concordances, introductions, and theolo-
gies. The best Hebrew CONCORDANCE is S. Mandelkern's Veteris 
Testamenti concordantiae Hebraicae atque Chaldaicae (3d ed.; 
Jerusalem-Tel Aviv: Schocken, 1956, 1959). The best Greek con-
cordance is Moulton-Geden's A Concordance to the Greek Testament 
(3d ed.; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1926). Less comprehensive 
though usable are Lisowski's Konkordanz zum hebraischen Alten 
Testament (Stuttgart: Wiirttembergische Bibelanstalt, 1958) for 
the OT and Schmoller's Handkonkordanz zum griechischen Neuen 
Testament (9th ed.; Stuttgart: Warttembergische Bibelanstalt, 
1951) for the NT. For those who do not read the Hebrew or Greek 
too well, G. V. Wigram's Englishman's Hebrew and Chaldee Concord-
ance (5th ed.; London: Samuel Bagster and Sons, 1890) and The

--- Page 278 ---
268 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Englishman's Greek Concordance (London: Samuel Bagster and Sons, 
1839) are available. In both of these, the words in the original 
languages are arranged alphabetically, each word is provided with 
an English pronunciation, and the passages where the word is 
found and a translation of the passages with the involved word in 
italics are given. For the English Bible (kJV), Robert Young's 
Analytical Concordance to the Bible (rev. ed.; New York: Funk & 
Wagnalls, 1902) and James Strong's The Exhaustive Concordance of 
the Bible (New York: Methodist Book Concern, 1894) are the best. 
Young's concordance is handier in that it lists the Greek or 
Hebrew word in the text and lists the passages for the word in-
volved according to the word in the original. For instance, the 
English word robber translates six different words, five Hebrew, 
and one Greek. There are, then, six different listings for this 
one English word, one for each of the words. Young also includes 
as a bonus an article by William F. Albright entitled "Recent 
Discoveries in Bible Lands." The advantage of Strong's is that 
it is exhaustive in that it lists every word found in the Bible. 
For the Greek OT there is available Hatch-Redpath's A Concordance 
to the Septuagint (Graz: Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt, 
1954). 
Concordances are useful not only in determining the precise 
meaning of a word by its use throughout Scripture but also more 
specifically for our purpose in seeing how the author of the book 
we are studying uses a particular word. Through the concordance 
we can check all his uses of the word in the book in question. 
This analysis will guide us in understanding his use of this word 
in the text in question. 
The best conservative INTRODUCTIONS to the OT are R. K. 
Harrison's Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 1969) and Gleason L. Archer, Jr.'s, A Survey of Old Testament 
Introduction (Moody, 1964;) and to the NT, Donald Guthrie's New 
Testament Introduction (Downers Grove, Ill.: Inter-Varsity Press, 
1971). Not everything can be accepted in the following liberal 
introductions, but much can be learned from them when they are 
used cautiously: Otto Eissfeldt's The Old Testament: An Intro-
duction (New York: Harper, 1965) and Feine-Behm-Kiimmel's Intro-
duction to the New Testament (14th rev. ed.; Nashville: Abingdon 
Press, 1966). 
More useful for our purposes are THEOLOGIES that deal with 
the specific book we are exegeting. However, such are not always 
available. Some introductions provide a limited theology for each 
book. Unfortunately, there are no really good large theologies 
of the Bible written from the conservative viewpoint. Used with 
discrimination, one can profit from the OT theologies of Von Rad,

--- Page 279 ---
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 	 269 
Eichrodt, Vriezen, and Jacob. The same is true for the NT theolo-
gies of Richardson, Jeremias, Bultmann (especially in Paul), and 
Conze1mann. H. D. McDonald has come out with Living Doctrines of 
the New Testament (London: Pickering and Inglis, 1971), which 
treats separately the theologies of the different books or groups 
of books. 
The next step in exegesis is to be acquainted with Bible 
backgrounds, so that knowledge of the geography, history, habits, 
customs, practices, thought, and religion can illuminate our 
understanding of the text. For such purposes we need atlases, 
archaeological books, histories, dictionaries, and contemporary 
sources. The best ATLAS is still Wright-Filson's The Westminster 
Historical Atlas to the Bible (rev. ed.; Philadelphia: Westminster 
Press, 1956); although the student should consult Grollenberg's 
Atlas of the Bible (New York: Nelson, 1956) for the excellent 
photographs and the Atlas of Israel (2d ed.; Jerusalem and Amster-
dam: Israel Government - Dept. of Surveys, Am Elsevier Pub. Co., 
1970) for geographical information. For the latter purpose Denis 
Baly's Geography of the Bible (New York: Harper, 1957) is an 
excellent source. E. M. Blaiklock's Pictorial Bible Atlas (Grand 
Rapids: Zondervan, 1969) has many good features and can be used 
with profit. 
There are several fine volumes dealing with ARCHAEOLOGY and 
the Bible. One of the best from the standpoint of an evangelical 
scholar is M. F. Unger, Archaeology of the Old Testament (Zonder-
van, 1954). From a critical scholar, one of the best is G. Ernest 
Wright's Biblical Archaeology (rev. ed.; Philadelphia: Westminster 
Press, 1962). Another good treatment is William F. Albright's 
The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (New York: Harper, 1965). 
One that deals specifically with the New Testament, though mainly 
the Gospels, is Jack Finegan's The Archaeology of the New Testa-
ment (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969). For contem-
porary source materials none are better than James Pritchard's 
two volumes, Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testa-
ment (2d ed.; Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1955) and 
The Ancient Near East in Pictures Relating to the Old Testament 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954), both of which have 
been brought up to date by The Ancient Near East: Supplementary 
Texts and Pictures Relating to the Old Testament (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1969). Less comprehensive is D. 
Winton Thomas' Documents From Old Testament Times (New York: 
Harper, 1961). Source material for the NT is found in C. K. 
Barrett's The New Testament Background: Selected Documents (Lon-
don: S.P.C.K., 1956). Other contemporary sources include R. H. 
Charles' The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament 
(2 vols.; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913) and the Jewish Apocryphal

--- Page 280 ---
270 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
Literature series, edited by Solomon Zeitlin (New York: Harper, 
1950-) for the intertestamental period; Millar Burrows' two vol-
umes The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York: Viking, 1958) for the Eng-
lish translation of the Qumran Scrolls; the series Discoveries in 
the Judaean Desert (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1955-) contains fac-
similes and translations of the scrolls but not always in English; 
and H. Danby's The Mishnah (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1933), 
The Babylonian Talmud (35 vols.; London: Soncino, 1935-1952), edi-
ted by I. Epstein, and Midrash Rabbah (9 vols.; London: Soncino, 
1951), edited by H. Freedman and M. Simon, for rabbinic sources. 
For OT HISTORY John Bright's A History of Israel (Philadelphia: 
Westminster, 1959) is the best; Emil Scharer's A History of the 
Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ (2d ed.; Edinburgh: T. 
& T. Clark, 1891) remains the best for the intertestamental period; 
and Floyd Filson's New Testament History (Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster, 1964) and F. F. Bruce's book (London: Nelson, 1969) by the 
same title are the best for the NT period. 
BIBLE DICTIONARIES are very useful tools for quick information 
on a subject or identification of names of persons, places, or 
things. They are a great timesaver for the exegete. The best 
Bible dictionaries from the critical point of view are The Inter-
preter's Dictionary of the Bible (4 vols.; Nashville: Abingdon 
Press, 1962), edited by George Buttrick; and for a more conserva-
tive approach the International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia (5 
vols.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1930), edited by James Orr and 
revised by M. G. Kyle. This work is currently under revision to 
be published by Eerdmans. It is expected to be the best Bible 
dictionary from the conservative approach. Other smaller but good 
dictionaries are The New Westminster Dictionary of the Bible (Phila-
delphia: Westminster Press, 1970), edited by H. S. Gehman; The 
Seventh-day Adventist Bible Dictionary (Washington, D.C.: Review 
& Herald, 1960), by Siegfried H. Horn, and The New Bible Diction-
ary (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1962), edited by J. D. Douglas. 
After the previous steps in exegesis have been completed, one 
is ready to put into an exegesis of the passage all the information 
obtained through these steps. This is only a tentative exegesis 
of the passage. 
After this has been done, and only then, should one read vari-
ous COMMENTARIES to see how others treated the passage and evaluate 
different viewpoints presented by these commentaries. It is im-
portant to know the commentaries that are profitable for this 
purpose. 
Of course to begin with every Seventh-day Adventist minister

--- Page 281 ---
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 	 271 
will have the basic library of Ellen G. White writings and he 
should have the Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commentary. The 
Ellen G. White volumes Patriarchs and Prophets and Prophets and 
Kings on the OT; The Desire of Ages and The Acts of the Apostles 
on the NT in general, Thoughts From the Mount of Blessing on the 
Sermon on the Mount, and Christ's Object Lessons on the parables 
of Jesus; and The Great Controversy Between Christ and Satan on 
the prophecies of Daniel and Revelation; would be basic. Without 
negating the principle of the Bible being its own interpreter the 
Seventh-day Adventist recognition of the role of Ellen White as 
the "special messenger of the Lord" to the church, gives to her 
writings a level of authority that is superior to that given to 
other sources and tools of interpretation. At the same time, the 
minister-teacher who would wish to grow in exegetical skills will 
want to grapple with the biblical text, following the steps out-
lined above, before turning to these or any other commentaries. 
The Adventist minister should have other types of commentaries, 
preferably those based on the Hebrew and Greek texts. Conservative 
commentaries of this type are rare. The Biblical Commentary of 
the Old Testament (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1872), based on the 
Hebrew text by Keil and Delitszch, is old and needs updating, but 
because of the sparse resources available still fulfills a need. 
The best set of conservative commentaries is the New International 
Commentary (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1951-), but it is far from 
complete, especially in the OT. The Tyndale Old Testament Com-
mentaries, which began to appear in 1964 and are now available in 
a number of OT books, are written by conservative-evangelical 
scholars who are united in their belief in divine inspiration. The 
International Critical Commentary (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1895-) 
is old and reflects a particular period in critical biblical stud-
ies, but several volumes in this series continue to prove useful, 
notably Romans by Sanday and Headlam, 1 Corinthians by Robertson 
and Plummer, and Galatians by Burton. The Cambridge Greek Testa-
ment Commentary (Cambridge: At the University Press, 1957-) so 
far has come out with two excellent commentaries--on Mark by C. B. 
Cranfield and on Colossians and Philemon by C. F. D. Moule. The 
superb commentaries of J. B. Lightfoot (Galatians, Philippians, 
Colossians, and Philemon) and B. F. Westcott (John, Hebrews, 
epistles of John), though old, are still unsurpassed in meticulous 
and careful exegesis. Several sets of moderately liberal commen-
taries if used judiciously will be found useful. On the OT, there 
is the Old Testament Library, published by Westminster Press, 
1961-; on the NT, Harper's (Black's in England) New Testament Com-
mentaries (New York: Harper, 1957-') and the Moffatt New Testament 
Commentary (New York: Harper, 1927-1959). For the entire Bible, 
the following are available or are in process of publication: the 
Anchor Bible (New York: Doubleday, 1964-), Hermeneia (Philadel-

--- Page 282 ---
272 	 A Symposium on Biblical Hermeneutics 
phia: Westminster, 1971-% and the Interpreter's Bible (Nashville: 
Abingdon, 1956). There are also some valuable individual com-
mentaries not connected with any series. We list only a few: 
Vincent Taylor, The Gospel According to St. Mark (London: Macmil-
lan, 1959); John Martin Creed, The Gospel According to St. Luke 
(London: Macmillan, 1960); C. K. Barrett, The Gospel According 
to St. John (London: S.P.C.K., 1960); F. F. Bruce, The Acts of 
the Apostles: The Greek Text With Introduction and Commentary (2d 
ed.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1953); Anders Nygren, Commentary 
on Romans (Philadelphia: Muhlenberg, 1949); Joseph A. Robinson, 
St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians (2d ed.; London: Macmillan, 
1914); Joseph B. Mayor, The Epistle of St. James (3d ed.; London: 
Macmillan, 1913); Francis W. Beare, The First Epistle of Peter 
(2d ed.; Oxford: Blackwell, 1958); E. G. Selwyn, The First Epis-
tle of St. Peter (2d ed.; London: Macmillan, 1952). 
After checking commentaries, the preacher is now ready to 
rework his exegesis. Perhaps he failed to take into consideration 
certain information or points of view that the commentaries have 
suggested. This may mean some modification in the final form of 
the exegesis. 
The next step is to ask, What meaning has this text for me? 
How does it apply to my situation and circumstance today? The 
Word of God spoke to men not only in ancient times but also speaks 
to men today. 
Other helpful BIBLIOGRAPHIES listing tools for interpretation 
are the following: 
Danker, Frederick W. Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study. St. 
Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1960. 
This is an excellent volume that has full discussions on 
each of the types of tools, giving something of their 
history and explanation of how to use them to the fullest 
advantage, along with the most important tools. More de-
tailed and comprehensive than Kelly and Miller. 
Glanzman, George S., S.J.; and Fitzmyer, Joseph A., S.J. 
An Introductory Bibliography for the Study of Scripture. West-
minster, Md.: The Newman Press, 1962. 
Though written by Catholic scholars, anyone will profit 
from this annotated list of tools for the study of the 
Bible. Reliable. 
Kelly, Balmer H., and Miller, Donald G., eds. Tools for 
Bible Study. Richmond, Va.: John Knox Press, 1947. 
Similar to, though does not completely overlap, Danker.

--- Page 283 ---
Tools of Biblical Interpretation 	 273 
Another helpful bibliography although covering the broader 
field of theological study is Theological Bibliography: Basic 
Books for the Minister's Library, published by the Student Form 
of the Seventh-day Adventist Theological Seminary, 1970, made up 
largely from contributions of the Seminary Faculty and edited by 
Sakae Kubo, Charles Sandefur, and Jim Walters. 
NOTES